The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesRelics, Relic worship and stupas in the ChineseTranslation of the ekottarika-agamaElsa LEGITTIMoIntroductory notesThe present paper focuses on relics and stupas ftom the point of view of an indo-centralAsan ekottorika-agama a version that has only survived in a chinese translation ofthe fourth century a.d. This collection is nominally equivalent to the pali anguttara-nikoya but differs partly from it in substance. The chinese and the Pali "numericalcompendiums" represent the only two knowncomplete versions.The chinese ea preserves references to early buddhist teachings, some of which havenot sutvived in other versions, as well as nummerous traces of doctrinal evolution. Theseseemingly contradictory aspects are not mutually exclusive and most likely indicate thatthe collection was transmitted orally for a long time, possibly up to the time of its translationinto chinese at the end of the fourth century. a long oral transmission process couldaccount for the " natural growth"" of the collection. this supposition goes hand in hand withthe hypothesis that the extant Ea might still be the translation mmade by buddhasmrti (ZhuFonian佛念)in chang'an(長安)ina.d. on the basis of the exposition recited byDharmanandi(曇摩難提),2)possibly from memory.3) The ea often bears the imprint olBuddhasmrti's translation style and terminology. in connection with the topic ofthis paper,its particular transcription for stupa should be noted.4)like most buddhist scriptures the eacontains prescriptions that applied to the religiouscommunity to which it belonged. as we will see, stupas and relics must have played aimportant role for them. the passages discussed in this paper have, with two exceptions,no pali parallel.siupus and the merit or demerit related to their construictionsIn ancient India up to thecentuty a.d a stupa containing real or synbolic relics wasbuilt as a compact monument. aa sutra prescribing formalities related to certain
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS(58)relics, relic worship and stupas in the chinese translation of the ekottariku-agama . legittimo)eeremonies incidentally gives an interesting architectural detail.) the buddha expoundsthe five occasions when monks should not face or turn towards a ceremony orrite(向禮):"when staying withi a stupa(在偸婆中),ina crowd of people, on the road, ill and bedridden orat the time of drinking and eating(飲食時).2as walk-in stupas have never been discovered, 〓to stay withina stupd" certainly fefers tothe construction around a stupa, a locis commumis of early buddhist monastic architecture :the building in which a stupa was placed as a symbol for the buddha's presence. as suchstupa halls developed in buddhist monasteries and temples after the buddha's mirvana, thepassage and eventually the whole sutra is a later addition.I another easutra the bhagavat expounds the four brahmanical merits (brahma-puny梵福).6)Iquote the first two:"if believing good menor good women build a stupa ia place where there was none, the fact ofhaving been able to build such a stupa corresponds to the first brahma-punya. fuither, if they re.tote an ancient temple(補治故寺),this cotresponds to the second brahmna-pumya.The express request to build a stupa where there is none appears in a nearly identical wayin abhidharmic treatises translated after the ea, for example, in the abhicharma (mahd )vibhasa. both extant chinese translations of this work' state that there are four ways people〓an produce brahma-punya 〓The first [ way] is to build a stupa in a place where there isnone yet, for the relics ofa buddha/ tathagata."According to another sutra, merit can also be acquired by taking care of a stupa inaccordance with a five-fold prescription:The earth should be sprinkled with water, stones and [broken pieces of] earthenware should bereimoved, its surrounding ground should be leveled, the ground should be swept with prope1attention/with a proper mind(端意掃地)and dirt and evil should be eliminated(除去穢惡).bythese five modes the person cleaning a stupa will acquire merit.I〓contrast, destroying a stupa causes great demerit. asutra on the eight great hells,9  filledwith sordid details on the pains inflicted to the beings, explains the causes leading to suc〓
unfortunate destinies." one of the hells is called avici. beings who kill their parents, who damage a buddhist stupa(壞佛偸婆),who create schism in the samghu, or who follow evil, decadent views acting according tothese evil doctrines, all [these kind of sins andor all the people who commit them] cn not becured or washed."
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSrelics, Relic worship and stupcs in the chinese translation of the ekottarika-aguma (.lcittmo)(59As we will see in the next section, merit in connection with stupa worship always derivesfrom the worship performed with regards to its factual or symbolic relics.Relics
among the extant nikaycs and agamas only the eacontains a sutra entirely devoted toMaitreya's future buddhahood.1i this sutra the future buddha Maitreya expounds inverses what people should do to come close to him. The fifth yutha is:Sakyamuni's followers(釋種)11)who are goodinconverting [the beings], by worshipping all theelics(供養諸舍利)[and] performing ceremonies and dharma related worship, [they] now comsto where iam.[〓 a sutra explaining the eight reasons for great earthquakes,a) relics are mentioned in avery peculiar place. The text has several parallels, two ipali (dighanikaya and anguttara.nikaya) and several in chinese.13) the parallel versions explain the first cause for an earth-quake in approximately the same way:〓This great earth rests on water, the water rests orwind and the wind exists in space. when great winds blow they shake the water and theshaken water causes the earth to shake." The eA however says"This jambudvipa measures from south to north20yoianas, from east to west7yoianas,and it is 8 yoiaras thick. The thickness of the water is 84yoiamas. The thickness of thefire is 84 yoians. underneath the fire the thickness of the wind is 68.0yoianas. undemneaththe wind there is the boundary with the diamond circle (vairacakrg金剛輪).14)the totality of therelics of all the past buddhas is in that space. when the winds move, the fire also moves, when thefire moves, the water also moves, and when the water moves. the earth will also move.The vajirgcakra refers to the lowest layer of the world and to its outeimnost citcle and is nota typical concept of early buddhism. This layer of relics is reminiscent of the relic land(vojiraksetra金剛刹)of the womb-sutra that contains all the buddhas' relics which consistofa single solid mass (ekaghama sarira全身舍利).15The parallels know no such vajracakra layer. The cosmological expansion we see inthe eA,i.e. the vajracakra full of relics underneath the other, more traditional layers iscertainly an interpolation.The other texts of the ea which mention stupas and relics refer to relics of particularbuddhist disciples ot ancient buddhas.alg sutra of the ea is dedicated to sariputra's(shelifu舍利弗)nirvana and more precisely to his relics.1) The text says that aftersariputra's mirvuna, his relics are taken care ofby ahanda and the buddha himself.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies(60)relics, relic worship and stupas in the chinese translation of the ekottarika-agamd . legittimo)of particular interest is the sutra on mahaprajapati's a'aidao大愛道)nirvana, thestepmother and aunt of the buddha.The narration exists in various versions.18) whe1Mahaprajapati hears that the buddha will shortly enter mipovana, she wishes to enter nippangbefore him. a group of five hundred nuns, and later two sramaneri(沙彌尼)follow herexample and also enter nirvanu . thereafter, when the gods want to handle the relics ofthese holy women and perform the necessary rituals, the buddha announces he will do thishimself" [Regarding] the mothers of the past buddha-bhagavats who previously obtainednirvana, the budcha-bhagavats all performed the worship and the cremation(蛇旬)of therelics by themselves."19) The buddha then orders the construction of stupcs over the relicsof all of these holy women and adds that four types of people deserve to have stupas builtover their remains. tathagatas, cakravartin kings, sravakas, and pratyekabuddhas. Thosewho build stupcs for them will receive immeasurable luck.Three sutras of the eanarrate stories about past buddhas" mirvana and inform us abou1their relics. although the sutras were expounded on different occasions and the personsnames as well as certain components of the stories differ. the frame is very similar. Thefirst passage refers to a tathagata called dengguang(燈光)whose sanskrit name might bepradipa.  king prasenajit (bosini波斯匿)is the main interlocutor of the buddhethroughout the sutra. The buddha tells him the story of a king called "lord of the earth"( dizhu地主).to this king a son is born with the 32 signs of a great being. when the songrows older he leaves the palace and practices the path until he becones a buddha calledpradipa tathagata. when the tathagata enters nirvana his father, the king, builds a stupa(神寺)over his relics and 8,000,00,000arhat temples. at that time he is 700,00 yearsold and he lives another 700,0 years during which he worships the tathagata's relics.after hearing this story prasenaiit converts to buddhism.〓n the occasion ofa great donation from king aiatasatru sheshi阿闍世),the buddhatells ananda and the monks the story of an ancient king called " good government"" (shar-huczhi善化治).21)to summarize: this king has a son called "Thoughts of love"" (ainian愛念),who leaves the household and becomes a buddha. when he passes away, his fathertakes the relics, performs the funerary rites ye wei耶維),22) builds a great divine shrine(stupa大神祠)there and regularly pays worship to his son. This story has a partial parallel〓ali: the buddha's previous name is Susima and his father is not a king but a brahmincalled Samkha. The stupa is not built by the father but by pratyekabuddhcs and other
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesrelics, relic worship and stipas in the chinese translation ofthe ekottariku-agama . lgittimo)(61people. when looking for his son, the brahmin finds the freshly erected stupa, takes careofits surroundings and worships itThe third related passage tells the story of a king called "repercussion" or " echo ofSound""(yinxiamg音響)who named his son Subhuti (xuputi須菩提).4)The son leaves thehousehold, becomes a buddha and enters nirvona. his father, the king, is then instructedby sakra devanam indra to perform a cremation ceremony in the same way as for a cakrg.vartin king, and to erect a stupa(愉婆)over the buddha's relics.The three narrations have a similar progression. whether they originally referred to oneand the same story must be left undecided.Final remarkSstupas are monuments that should be erected and well maintained. Such deeds producsgreat merit, and, of course, stups should not be willfully destroyed, except one wishes tobe rebotn in one of the worst infernal abodes. within the knowgumufnikoya literaturethe idea that building a stupa leads to immeasurable merit in the brahma-heaven occursonly in the ea. whether there should be any relics in the newly constructed stupg, and ifSo, exactly whose relics, is left to our imagination. likewise, relics are neither mentionedin relation to the merit acquired through stupa maintenance, nor in the singular passagethat refers to a monk staying within a stupa hall. in contrast, the poem expounded byMaitreya makes no reference whatsoever to stupas but states that devotional worship of theBuddhas' relics leads to rebirth at the time of his buddhahood. despite these peculiarities,stupas and relics are not dissociated. The sutras that narrate the stories of buddhistdisciples' and ancient buddhas nipvana clearly illustrate the triangulat connection, whichexists between stupas, relics and their worship. of particular interest is that the buddhahandles Sariputra's and his stepmother's relics himself.The above passages itrefutably show the narrative and philosophical importance of relicsand the monuments enshrining them from the perspective of the ancient holders of the ea.Notes
1)The Zengyi ahcnig(増壹阿含經,t2,no.125,549a-830b)2)The buddhist canonical tradition handed down a different text transmission history andvicwed the present collection as the second translation made by gautaina samghadeva(曇僧伽提婆)in397a.d. The issue of the ekottarikc-ogama's translation has been discussed by
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies(62)relics, Relic worship and stupas in the chinese translation ofthe ekottarika-agama (. legitTiMo)several Japanese scholars, see for example: mizuo(1956,1989),unEBE(1968),warita(1973),okayama(84)and enomoto(184,1986).The buddhasmrti-hypothesis iscorroborated by a forthcoming case study eGittio2008).3)In the zengyi ahan jingxu oan says that dharmanandi knew two agamas by heart, one ofthem the ekottarika-agama (cf. t2,no.125,p.549a12).4)stnpais never translated as ta(塔),but always as toupo(倫婆),a rather uncommon tenm forwhich buddhasmrti had a predilection as it is also found in other translations by himbuddhasmrti also uses the term shensi(神寺),literally "divine temple" or "gods' shrine"", forBuddhist temple andor stupa.5)T2,699c.
6)t2,6-66c.
〓)for the abhidharma (mahd) vibhsa cf. t27,no.1545,45c3-21(tr.by xua zang玄奘inthe middle of the 7th century) and t28,no.154,319b17-22(tr. by buddhavarman浮陀跋摩between7-39).8)T2,688b-688c.9)T2,747-748
10)t2,787-789c. this sutra is identical to the " sutra on maitreya's coming down to birth""(〓勒下生經,〓14,no.453.see lgittio2(forthcomning). from the time of its translationinto chinese the sutra formed part of the ea. It was translated by buddhasmrti, and only latercirculated also as a separate text that was then wrongly attributedto dharmaraksa(竺法護).11)lit. the seeds of sakya, i.e. the sakya clan, but also the followers of Sakyamuni's teachings.12)T2,753c-754a.13)a.vi.70bhumicula, d.1. parinibbana s.30,the chinese ma(,no.2477478b.the chinese d,no.1,15c-16a), and the vinayaksudrakavastu of the mulasarvastivadins,cf. waldtschdt1951,212and t2,no.1451,388a. See also legittio200,25-26,67.14)The chinese term might be a translation of vairc-cakra or vairo-mandalc.15)c. lcittio205,69,and the pus chutai jing(苦薩處胎經,t12,no.84,1026).16)T2,639-642b.17)T2,821b-823b.18)all the extant versions on mahapraiapati gautami's nitvana have been discussed by sylvainLevi inasvaghosa, le sutralamkara et ses sources", journl asiatique, vol. xii, Paris 19,p.160-174
19)she 〓un(蛇旬)is found eleven times in to sutras of the ekottarikc-agama and nowhereelse. it might be a repeated copyist's error for ye 〓un(耶旬),a transcription for the act ofperforming a cremationhyapita). For an overview on the indic and chinese tenms used irBuddhist texts for cremation, cf. seid's entry in the hobogirin8573-585,20)t2,609a-611c. this king seems to be unrelated to candapaiiota whose namein chinese trans-lations is also dengguang.〓
21)T2.728a.

The  uapanese sSOciationofIndian and BuddhiStStudiesRelics, Relic worship and stupas in the chinese Translation of the ekottarika-agama (.egitTiMo)(63)22)note the different transcription.23)cf. the "gangarohanavatthu", pali: noRman1912, vol.〓,p.436-449,english: buRlINGAME1921,vol. iii, p.168-176.24)T2.814b-817a.abbreviationsj journlof indicm ad buddhist studies『印度学仏教学研究』b budmhist studies reviewsjbs. Sengokuyoma journalof buddhist studies『仙石山論集』〓 transactions of the asiatic society ofjapanburLInGamE, Eugene watson, buddhist legends-dhammapad commentary, vol. ii, Harvarcoriental Series, vol.30,cambridge. Massachusetts 1921.leGittiMo, elsa, "The natural surroundings of the buddha's last trip: notes on environmentalTopics in the mahaparinirvana-sutra", sjbs,vol. i, Sept.200,p.1-72.-,"synoptic presentation of the pus chu tai jing-pi(chapters 1-14",sjbs, vol.ii,september2,p.1-111.-, 〓Reopening the maitreya files-two almost identical early Maitreya-sutra translations in thechinese canon: wrong attributions and text-historical entanglements", journal of the interng-tionlassociationofbuddhist studies, vol.29,no.2,208,[p.1-41],forthcoming.〓akl, tatsugen牧達玄,a study of the devaduta-sutra of the ekottarika-agama32-4",「『増-阿含経善聚品32-4・天使経』考」,jbs, vol.34,no.1, dec.1985,p.148-153.Mayeda, Egaku, " japanese studies on the schools of the chinese agamas", Heinz bechert (ed.),zur schulzugehorigkeit von werken der hinayan-literatur, erster teil, gottingen198,p.94-103.
NoRMaN, h. c., the commentonyyo the dhommapada, vol.ii, pTS, London112seideL, anna, "dabi茶毘",hobogirin, vol. 〓v,1983,p.573-585.ShizutaNI, Masao静谷正雄,"The school affiliation of the ekottarika-agama's chinese trans-ation"「漢訳『増一阿含経』の所属部派」,jibs, vol.21,no.2,1973,p.54-59.(postdoctoral researcher)
