The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe attainment of Supreme enlightenment throughthe offerings Represented in the suvarnaprabhosaSuZukTakayasu1.The aimof This Paper:acontinuous verification of the hypothesisAs shown in the previous studies,1 the present author has proposed and verified thefollowing hypothesis on the intentions of the compilers of the suvarnaprabhasa utra ofGolden light, u)( The iypothesis) owing to the account of the uv which has, through the several stages of itsformation, collected and demonstrated the various kinds of doctrines and rites of both mundane ancsupermundane levels expounded previously in the treatises either of mahayana, of non-mahay'ana,or of non-buddhism (ie., of hinduism). the compilers and the proponents of the suv became moreable to lead their daily religious lives, including their practice of various rites and theit attainmentof various religious merits, in accordance with "the teaching of the sm," that is, "the teaching of[Mahayana] buddhism." we can therefore intetpret the features appearing in the suv not as a to-kenof " the assimilation of buddhism into hinduism"or " the depravity of buddhism," but as an at-tempt of budcdhists to survive in the indian religious world by emphasizing the value, the useful-ness, and the completeness of [Mahayana] buddhism under the circumstances where hinduismhad become more and more dominant over buddhism (during and after the gupta period). More-over, if one of the intentions of the compilers of the su lies in this attempt by collecting as manydoctrines and rites as possible. either of mundane or supetmundane levels, or of buddhism or non-Buddhism, from the stage of the formation of the suv, to that of the smc3 consistently, we carsuppose that the intention of the compilers has remained unchanged all through the stages of theformation of the smv. furthermore, it may tun out that the suv is not "a mere miscellaneous medley of doctrines and rites," but a collection of them which is intrinsic to the value of the suv.juzuki [2]has provided the most recent study on this subiect, and the followingtentative conclusion has been reached."The five chapters on the various gods and goddesses") begins with the caturmaharoic-parivarta which emphasizes the superiority of buddhism over hinduism and attempts to converithe people of the class of kings to buddhism. after the successive attempts in the following threechapters to attract the people of the various classes who are ruled by the kings, "the Five chapters"
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesThe attainment of supreme enlightenment through the offerings represented in the suvarnaprabhesa T. suzuk)79)concludes with the samina-parivarta in which a Yaksa general who is the head of the chief reti-nues of caturmaharaias and knows all things whether of mundane or supermundane levels, andwhether of buddhism or non-buddhism, plays an important role to reinforce the discourse of theCaturmahoraia-parivarta.From the examination of "ethe five chapters"we can recognize the deep consideration of thecompilers of the y toward the mnembers of roval families. from this consideration they have suc-sessively compiled the devendrasamaya-parivart chapter on instruction concerning divineKings; chapter of the suv), which instructs a king on how to rule various people and exercisehis kingshipin order to realize the welfare of the people.Buddhism had once stood foremost in the religious world of india under the patronage of thegreat kings such as king asoka of the Maurya empire or king kaniska of the kushan empire.However during and after the gupta period when the su was compiled, buddhism has been al-ready lost its dominant position to hinduism. under such circumstances the compilers of the suv.by obtaining various kinds of aid of the kings as well as of theif people, must have attemmpted tcurvive in the feligious world for the sake of accomplishing the duties ofthe buddhist clergyThis paper continues to verify (the hypothesis) and the tentative conclusion by exam-ining the susambhav-parivarta (chapter o cakravartin-king called Susambhava, chapterofhe smy),4)which directly follows the devendrasamoya-parivarta.2.an examination of the susambhava-pariparta chapter on cakravartin-kingcalled Susambhava, chapter 21)The susambhava-porivcrta consists of 32verses in which the lord sakyamuni tells thetory of his former lives. we will begin by examining the story with translations,  andnotes putin bold brackets.ersel[The lord spoke.,] "when i became cakravartin-king then i gave up the eartwith its oceans. I presented the four continents full of jewels to the former buddhas."た【The lord said that he had made offerings to the buddhas when he was botn a king. how-ever it turns out later that this chapter 21proclaims that the actual obiects to which offer-ings should be made are the buddha's teachings and the buddhist monks, not the bud-dhas.】
verse2"For the sake of my research for a body composed of the law dharmakaya)there is no loved, pleasing object which i did not formerly give up. i gave up [even] mydear life during numerous aeons."n this chapter21offerings ofriches and life are considered the chief means to attain dharmakaya ic. supreme enlightenment), though this chap-
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies80)the attainmentof supreme enlightenment through the offeings represented in the suarnaprabhusa. suzukter has no actual description about giving up life. we see fron verse bo and31that offer-ings of life are experienced during other former lives.】versei did those offerings] as [imade] to the teaching of the [ former] buddharatnasikin in the inconceivable aeons past. [so iam going to tell you the story.] whenthat buddha had entered into his perfect peacefulness (parinirvrta), there arose a kingalled Susambhava."8)【this chapter takes up the offering a king called Susambhava madeto the teaching left behind by the buddha, as a typical example of the offerings for the sakeof the attaittnent of supreme enlightennent. it must be hoted here that the offering madeby susambhava was practiced after the buddha had entered into his perfect peacefulness,md that his offering was not made to the buddha, that is, not to the stupa of the buddha.!verse46In his dream king susambhava saw ratnoccaya, a preacher of the lawdharmabhanaka), expounding the suv. waking up from his sleep, the king approached joy-fully the assembly of the disciples (sravakasamgha) to see the preacher.The preacher oihe suv, which is one of the Mahayana sutras, is a member ofa traditional monastery.!/erse7having paid homage puia) to the monks, the king asked after the monlbhiksu) Ratnoccaya, the preacher of the su.0【(1)In this monastery Ratnoccaya seemto be the only preacher of the su, This can indicate that the smv is held by one specialnonkin a monastety.(2)even though the other monks are not preachers of the smv, theyire also expected to be paid homage by kings or the rich because a preacher of the smy be-ongs to their monastery.11)(3)ratnoccaya is a monk as well as a preacher of the sm.】verse8〓Then ratnoccaya was elsewhere, sitting in a solitary place, reflecting on thii(ing of sutras, reciting it, seated calmly.12)preacher of the suy, separate from the otler monks and seated solely and calmly ina solitary place, practices through retecting onand reciting the sm.】verse92 The monks showed the king the monk Ratnoccaya, the preacher of theSmv. worshipping Ratnoccaya, the king entreated him to expound the suv. ratnoccaya accepted the request of the king, and all the gods also rejoiced. king susambhava purifiedanirea by placing shower of jewels, perfumes, and flowers, and placed a seat for the monk.Then the king adorned that seat variously, elaborately, and excellently. a lot of divine be-ings came because they were desirous of the suv, and honored Ratnoccaya and the seat be-strewn with divine flowers. having purified himself with water and put on pure clothing,ratnoccaya approached that seat and did homage to it. he ascended the seat and sat down,
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesThe attainment of Supreme enlightenment through the offerings represented in the suyarnaprabhasa (T. suzukl)(81)mindful of the inconceivable number of the buddhas. producing compassion and a merci-ful mind for all beings, he then expounded the suy to the king.13)【if carried out literallenormous riches would be needed for the hearing of the suv, itis possible that these kindsof accounts may reflect the wish of the compilers of the sup that they should obtain offer-ings of riches for the sake of accomplishing their transmission of the law and religiouspractice.】
verse21hearing the suu, ] the king, having stood with his hands in the gesture ofreverence, uttered one voice of joy. his eyes shed tears at the force of the good law d-harma). his body became full of satisfaction.")14) 【we should notice here that the joy pro-duced by hearing the suy is mentioned.】verse22～24"For the sake of worshipping this sutra (imasya sutrasya pujanartham)King susambhava then took hold of the cintamani, king of jewels, and made a resolution(pranidhi) on account of the welfare of beings (sathvarthahetoh) "May there now rain downhere in Jambudvipa ornaments made of the seven jewels and may the beings here in Jam-budvipa be blessed with great riches." Then there rained down on the four continents theseven jewels, bracelets, necklaces, and excellent earrings, likewise food, drinks, and cloth-1g."15)【the compilers of the smy maintain that worship of the sy can be practicecthrough offerings ofriches.!verse2And when king susambhava saw this rain of jewels in Jambudvipa, he preented the four continents filled with jewels to the teaching of [the former buddha] Rat-nasikin catvari dvipani saratnapurna niryatayi ratnasikhisya sasane).1for the sake of wo【For the sake of wor-shipping the suy, the king who was desirous of attaining supreme enlightenment, filledfirst the continents with jewels. and then he presented all of them to the teaching left be-hind by the buddha who had already entered into his perfect peacefulness, that is, to theSy taught by the past buddha and to the preachers who hold the su. turning our eyes tothe period of the actual compilation of the suv, needless to say, it was after the buddheSakyamuni had entered into his perfect peacefulness. Therefore if lay people ( they can bekings or the rich) who wish to worship the sup following the account of this chapter for thesake of obtaining religious merits, they may be expected to make offerings not to the stu-as of the buddha sakyamuni but to the Suv and to their preachers.】verse26,27the lord sakyamuni announces that he was at that time king susam-bhava, and the buddha aksobhya was the monk Ratnoccaya, the preacher of the suv.1
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies82)the attainment of supreme enlightennent through the offerings representedin the suvarnaprabhasa t. suzuKl)verse28,29because I heard this sutra then [n the former life when i was kingsusambhava] and uttered one voice of joy, i obtained a body that has the color of gold u-varnavarnam … .  labheyi kayam),that has the marks of a hundred merits (satapunyalaksanam),always of pleasing appearance priyadarsanam sadd), delightful to the eyes (nayanabhira-mam) , beautiful for people to behold (ianakantadarsanam), causing pleasure to thousands ofmillions of gods (ratimkaram deasahasrakotinam).9)Ythough the attainment of a bod.composed of the law dharmakaya) is thought to be the final purpose in this chapter, wemay say that the finally obtained body described here is alnost as beautiful as* the materialbody (ripakaya)" of the buddha which is full of visual virtues. This equalization of dhar-makoya and rupakaya in visual virtues can be explained by one of the intentions of thecompilers of the suy to shift the central focus of buddhism from stupa worship to dharmeevaluation. see, in particular, suzuki [3].1verse 30,31"for nine hundred ninety billion aeons i was [any number of times.born cakravartin-king. For numerous hundreds of thousands of aeons I experienced lesse1kingship. For inconceivable aeons i was sakra, [the Lord of the gods, ] likewise kingBrahma whose mind is tranquil. immeasurable are the buddhas I have [met, served, and]pleased, whose measure can never be found."20)【(1)see the note on verse 2.(2)we caunderstand from here encouragement by the compilers of the suv that such offerings to thesu as illustrated in this chapter can be mmade even by those who are not cakravartin-kings,in other words, even by "kings or the rich like you."(3)The worship of the buddhasseems to be emphasized hete at first glance. following the discourse of this chapter, how-ever, one who wishes to worship the buddhas has to worship the suv if the buddhas hadalready entered into their perfect peacefulness; to put it more concretely " one has to wor-ship the suv at present because the buddha sakyamuni has already entered into his perfectpeacefulness." by reason of this the worship of the suvare to be emphasized all the nore.】verse32so immeasurable is the mass of my great merits since i heard this sutra andrcjoicedin it, as according to my desire i have obtained enlightenment (bodhi) and have attained the body composed of the good law (saddharmakaya).",21)This chapter represents that the lord sakyamuni has, as we have seen, obtained his en-lightenment and attained dharmakaya full of visual virtues through the offerings originatedin the hearing ofthe uv,
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesThe attainment of supreme enlightenmnent through the offerings represented in the suvarnaprabhosa T. Suzukl) (83)3.The Path to the attainment of Supreme enlightenment Representedin theSusambhav-parivartawe will now consider the path to the attainment of supreme enlightenment representedin this chapter. The path can be explained by the following five items(①～⑤):①to become desirous of obtaining supreme enlightenment and attaining dharmakaya.②to see the preacher of the snv, and to become willing to worship the suv after hav.ing heard and rejoiced in the smv.③to make offerings of riches as much as possible to the suv [and to the preachers ofthe Suv, likewise to the assemblies of the buddhist monks to which the preachers ofthe suy belong ] since at present the buddha who had taught the suv already en-tered into his perfect peacefulness.④to please the immeasurable buddhas, in case one can meet them in future lives,through the offerings not only ofriches but also of life. to do as shownin③i caseone cannot meet the buddhas in future lives,⑤by the mass of those religious merits accumulated through③and①which areoriginated in the hearing of the suv, supreme enlightenment can be obtained anddharmakoyu can be attained which is equal in visual virtues to rupakoya, that is, tothe stupa equated with the living buddha after the buddha's entering into his per-fect peacefulness.The following four points draw our attention: first, the religious merit aimed at in thischapter is the attainment of supreme enlightenment(①⑤),that is, supermundane nerit.This first point strongly contrasts with the characteristics of " the five chapters" and thedevendrasamy-parivarto, since the religious merits aimed at mainly in these successivesix chapters are the mmundane ones. Second, what this chapter takes up as a typical examnpleof the offerings for the sake of attaining supreme enlightenment is the offering a king madeto the teaching left behind by the former buddha(②),not the direct offering to the stupawhich has long been equated with the living buddha in the histoty of buddhism. Third, nodifference can be found between the merits accumulated through the offerings to the suvand those through the offerings to the buddhas(③④).These second and third points canbe associated with one of the intentions of the mahayana movement to shift the central fo-cus of buddhism fron stupa worship to dharma evaluation.Fourth, since the Smvwas
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies(84)the attainment of supreme enlightenment through the offerings Represented in the suvarnaprabhcsa T. suzuk)compiled after the buddha sakyamuni had entered into his perfect peacefulness, those "receivers" to whomlay people following the discourse of this chapter make their offerings ofriches become inevitably the smv and the preachers of the smv, likewise the assemblies ofthe buddhist monks to which the preachers of the smy belong.〓) Those offerings of richescan be made use of for the sake of the prevalence and the transmission of the snv or themaintenance of the monasteries because they are not the offerings to the budchas.al these factots discussedin this paper and the results obtainedby the previous studiestaken into consideration, we have come to the present conclusion given below.4conclusion
By the discourse of the susambhava-parivarta, the compilers of the suv attempts tmcourage lay people, especially kings or the rich, who are desirous of attaining supermundane merits to make offerings of riches not to the stupas of the buddha sakyamuni, but tothe preachers of the suy and the assemblies to which the preachers of the suy belong. wecan fairly suppose at least two backgrounds to this attempt: one is the intention of the ma-hayana movement to shift the central focus of buddhism from stupa to dharmna, and theother is, as has been discussed in the previous studies, the wish of the comnpilers of the suto survive in the religious wotld for the sake of accomplishing the duties of the buddhisiclergy by obtaining financial aid from lay people. whereas the religious merits aimed at in" the Five chapters" and the devendrasamaya-parivarta, which are the successive sixchapters and located just before this susambhav-parivarta, are mainly the mundane onesthose aimed at in this chapter are supermundane ones. Therefore by teaching those dis-courses of these successive seven chapters ("the five chapters," the devenctrasamaya-parivarta,and the slisambha-parivarta), the compilers of the uv become able to expect the offeringsnot only from the people who want to attain mundane merits, but also from those who wantjupermundane merits.4 Since those offerings are not " the offerings to the buddha," thebuddhist monks can utilize them for the sake of accomplishing their transmission of theLaw and religious practice for supreme enlightenment.we can thus say that the pumpose of this short paper was achieved in that the validity of(the hypothesis> has been even more strengthened.
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStstudiesThe attainment of supreme enlightenment through the offerings Represented in the suvarnaprabhus. SuzukI)(85)1)suzuki, t.[1996] the hahameghasutra as a origin of an interpolated part of the presentsuvarnaprabhosa, journal of indian ad buddlhist studies 89(45-1),pp.28-30, suzuki, t.[〓]stupa worship and dharm evaluation in the suvarnaprabhusa, journal of incic dbudchist studies 1(51-2),pp.32-36, suzuki, t. [24]Rites and buddhism aperspectivefromn the sarasvati-parivarta in the suvarnaprabhusa, journal of indian ad buddhist studies〓042-2),pp.12-1, suzuki,t. [2]The unchanged intention of the compilers of the sur-varnaprabhasa: examination through the verification of the hypothesis on "the independ-ence of [ mahayana] buddhism," journalofintian uddhisf stucies1(53-2),pp.2-6,suzuki, t. [20The primary introduction of the rites for good fortune into the suvcy-naprabhos described in the si-parivarto, jlournal of incicnd bucldhist studies104-3).pp.; suzuki, t. [2007]n intention of the compilers of the suvarnaprabhosa Expressedand intimated in the drdha-porivarta, journal of indicm d buddhist studies 11(55-3),pp.〓7,suzuki, t. [20] The characteristics of "the five chapters on the various Gods andGoddesses" in the suvarnaprabhasa, jjournal of indicn d buddhist studies 11(56-3),pp66-73; and suzuki [1998a,1998c,1999,2005a andbin japanese2)(texts and abbreviationsSvsuvarnaprabhasa or suvarn[-pr-] bhasottamasutrendraraia.juvct『金光明經』四卷,曇無識譯.t. no.663.Suvs suvarnabhasottamasutra, ed. J. nobel, leipzig,1937,Surphsp gser od dmpa mdo sde'i dbo' rgpolpbyabc theg p chen po'i md〓r-surarnaprabhasottamasutrendraroia-nama-mahovana-sutra, tr. unknown. Pno.176.suvc2『合部金光明經』八卷,寶貴合粽.t. no.664.su phags p gser 'od p mdo sde'i di po'i rgyalpo aes bya ba theg pa chen po'imdo, arya-suvarnaprabhasottamasutrendraraj-ncm-mahoyana-sutra, tr. jinamitra, silen.drabodhi and Ye ses sde. Pno.175Ss『金光明最勝王經』十卷,義淨譯.t. no.665.Susuvarnaprabhosottamasitra, ed. J. Nobel, leiden,19(T. taisho tripitaka, ppeking kanjur)3)The present author calls the setof the five successive chapters consisting of the caturmahara-〓-parivart (see suzuki ]),the sarsvuti-parivart (see suzuki [4]),the s-parivart (see suzuki [6]),the drdha-parivarta (see suzuki [007]),and the saminay-parivarta, " the Five chapters on the various Gods and goddesses"" or for short "the fiveChapters," which tells of the various merits granted to the proponents of the suv by the variousgods and goddesses.4)sivc7-348(善集品第十一)sms15(susambhava-parivarta),suvア115.0-119.22(legs par byun ba'i le'u),su231b10-392l,善集品第十七)Suu26(善生王品第二十一).the way of numbering the chapters〓
in this paper follows the way in the suv
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies〓6)the attainmentof supreme enlightenmnent through the offerings Represented in the suparnaprabhasaT. suzuki)5)These translations (either full or summarized) are mainly based on emmerick [1996(Thesutr of golenlighf: beingtranslation ofthe suvarnabhasottamasutra, ps.6)suvs1.9-146.2,〓15-4,u1-3,s391b12-14,m,44a19-20.7)suvs1-14., ,5-8,su38b3-6,suv, 3911-17,sa21-22.8)suvs1467-146.10, sr59-12, suv, 348b6-8, suvc2 391b17-19,suv3a23-24.9)summarized translation, suvs146.11-148.4,smvγ115.13-24,uvc,348b9-16,suvc2391b20-27,Su25-b1,10)Summarized translation, suvs148.-8, 〓,-4,uvc, 3417-19,sv,31b28-c1,Su2-3.
11)on the connection between the paying homage to (or worshipping) the buddhist monks andthe making offerings to them, see sasaki [1999153-176], Schopen210-225],suzuk[2006:4]and [0769-7012)suvs18.9-12,.5-8, suc,348b19-21,c231c1-3, s4b4-5.13)summarized translation, suvs148.13-151.13,suvr16.9-117.28,suvc,342-c27,suvc2391c3-3928, Su6-29.14)suvs1.14-17,〓.1-4, suc,348c27-349al, suc,392a9-12,u4c1-2.15)suvs151.18-152., sr1.-16,suc,349a1-9,suvc2392a12-20,s33-8.16)suvs12.7-10,s17-20,u,349a9-12,suvc2,392a20-22,c9-10.17)we can estimate the compilation to have taken place during and after the gupta period (fromthe fourth to the sixth century). See the previous studies listed in n.1.18)Summarized translation, suvs152.11-18,suv,18.21-28,su,349a12-16,sc, 392a23-26su-14.
19)suvs152.19-153.5,s,19.1-8,suv,349a16-20, u239a27-b2, s-18.20)suvs153.-13,〓.9-16,su,34a21-26,〓vc2392b2-7,suc19-22.21)sus114-17,〓,97-20,sc,349a26-29,su,392b8-10,u-24.22)there is room for further investigation whether this intention was infuenced by the situatiorin which the mahayana buddhists were placed. See schopen].23)See the note on verse 7 and n.11.24)The yaksasraya-parivart chapter22)which directly follows these seven chapters attempt:to connect supermundane merits with mundane ones, and seems to serve as 〓a coordinator"among the successive eight chapters. The discouirse of this chapter is expected to be examinedincoming studies.(This research was supported in part by japan society for the Promotion of science, grant-in-aidfor scientific research (c,19520053,2008.)<Key words)金光明最勝王経善生王品,金光明経善集品,金光明経の制作意図,仏塔信仰と経典崇拝,インド〔大乗〕仏教の実像理解(professor, Yamaguchi prefectural university, d.litt.)
