The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieseast meets west: bruno petzold and haniiro tominagao buddhism and Goethe (i)KotnI Yukio
Introduction
This report concemns the comparative studies in a double sense during the first half ofshowa-era by two personnages. bruno petzold(1873-1949),a professor of the first highSchool and a high- ranking t'ien t'ai monk remarked that, like sakyamuni for the lotusSutra. christ is the . embodiment of cosmic truth* der inbegriff der kosmischen wahrheit) forGoethe, who was influenced by the johamnine s gospel.1,,〓n the other hand, the independent scholar, haniiro tominaga(1883-1965) encoun-tered the oneness or unity of the saddharma-pundarika sutra, i.e. the lotus sutra, whilehe was searching for the ideal role for the Japanese in the world or the. universe. being un-satified with the chinese translation by kumarajiva, tominaga attempted to employ byGoethe's morphological method to the sanskrit text by picking out its original type (uttyp)and then identifying its metamotphosis in a dramatic form. This he termed the 〓 hokke-proper", whose symbolism we have elucidated previously in a series published in thisJounral.4)
(1)
petzold regarded goethe's original phenomena (urphanomene) as similar to the man-dala of Shingon, his polarity (polaritat) and rising (Steigerung) to the hahayana sraddhot-pada sastra, as preceding stage ofundisunited monotheistic metaphysics of the identity oftrue spirit with illusion in the avatamsaka (hua-yen) and tien'taiIn his goethe und mahayana buddhismus 1),petzold juxtaposed various termns. variousforeign terms. in the study-scene of Faust the hero translates the classic greek (logos) into(Tat) (action), at the beginning iof the johannine gospel. petzold applied this translationto the translation of (avidya-samskara) into nicht-wissen-taten illusion-action).he faith-
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesfully interpreted samskara according to the following traditional definition:"samskara, m.putting together, forming well, making perifect accomplishments, .. (pl.with buddhists) a mental conformation or creation of the mind (such as that of the externalworld, regarded by it as real, though actually non existent, and forming the second link in the twelve-old chain of causation orthe fourth of the s Skandhas)",5)underlined by kotaniIn shott, the question is the whole obiectification of the samskara into the outer world.according to tominaga, the difficult problem of understanding the five skandha system istotally due to that of an-atta) (non-ego or no-self-willedness in the huma mind), and princi-pally due to the fouth process of the series, samskara (unconsciously composing power ).Forhim, the key to solving the knotty problem exists also in samskara.let us touch the core of the problem, paying attention to the key-word of (samskara.Among the twelvefold chain of dependent-related phenomena, tominaga regarded onlythe first three as buddha's true teaching. he saw the progression from avidya) not as tra-ditionally defined ignorance leading towards deed or actions, but rather as an unconscious-ly formative power, resulting from an inept correspondence or dissimulation in the mentalprocess of (vedana) (feeling).(avijia paccaya-samkhara). through the working out of sams-kara is produced (vijnana> (consciousness).Tominaga surmised that the model of Fust's hero, who tries variously in his study totranslate the greek word of (oos into german, might have been kant. he says that.common scholars may be initially perplexedby the question, as to whether one can translatethis classical Greek word into tat (deed) ot not. but it is a trick. of which Goethe is wellaware. That makes him faust to translate it extremely painstakingly, trying to put it into(word>, next into (meaning>, still more into (might> and at last into (deed>. Itis a bewil-dering yet excellent translation that is laboriously elaborate, and that makes us suppose, asif there were a harmony in the compound word of practical Reason' (die praktische ver-munft). the combination of loos) with deed) indicates, in essence, an active characterThe originality of tominaga's thought consists in the subiective trial oflearning direct-ly the living experience after buddha's enlightenment. since ca1925.at the age ofo〓3,he began to repeat voicelessly the key-words of the los-utra: (rddhyabhisamska-ra) (completion of samskara / cf.羅什訳・「神通力」).In addition, in the early summer of
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies1937,he changed them into the buddha's last words at Capala i.e. (vaya-dhamma sam-khara) (cf.傳統解・諸行無常)he found these phrases iandersen's text-book〓, and con-tinued reciting them voicelessly without translating them. by doing so, he tried to learnand vividly live out the essence of Sakya buddha's most mature and thoroughgoing experi-ences, following his inner inspiration, tominaga crystallized the circumstances of theBuddha's two enlightenments, one at gaya (after the maha-vagga sutra ) and another at ca-pala (after ma pariniruana sutra'), into psychological and literary works repectively.(2)
In the conclusion of his above-mentioned book professor petzold wrote , as follows."if we designate the goethe's mental way it seems to be most proper to characterize itas panentheism. classifying the higher types of mahayana buddhism without denying theirpantheistic or mono theistic tendencies gives them multiplex nuances. in this way we canascertain an intimate relationship between goethe's various ideas and those of mahayanaBuddhism."9)
Goethe's theory of polarity (polaritat) is, according to petzold, the preliminary stagebefore the identity of the contrasts, which denotes the culminating pointof mahayana bud-dhism. his theory of the rise (steigerung) shows the most similarity to Mahayana's idea ofdevelopment, according to which all formulations of the apparently complete truth shouldbe broken anew again and again , to make way, as a result, for more complete ones.Goethe's view of life and world, as well as that of Mahayana, presupposes a boundlessfreedo of thought. petzold points out that some readers might be remninded of the upa-nisad and vedanta philosophy regarding the problemof the ego. they might be inclined toset the most highly developed maha yana as equivalent to them, as several religious phi-losophers did. but let us remark on this matter, as follows the upanisad and vedanta phi-losophy take their starting points fromthe ego (atman), while buddhism takes non-ego (an-atman) as its own starting point. The entire setting up of the problem is accordingly quitecontrary to that of the indian upanisads or vedanta."〓This explanation of petzold's is no better than the history of philosophy found in oldschoolbooks. it cannot escape, as we shall mention, the evils of abstractly scheinatizedgeneralizations of later intenpreters, culminating in metaphysics and the transcendental dia-
The japanese association of Indian and buddhiStStudies54)east meets west (Y. kotanI)lectic.
Next, we repeat the petzold's double comparison:" christ was for goethe, who hacbeen influenced by the johamnine gospel, the essence of the cosmic truth. In like mannerthe lotus sutra understands buddha; that is to say, as incorporeal, eternal and omnipresent,in short, as the embodiment of the cosmic truth. Like the idea of christ in case of Goethe.the idea of buddha appears.-ade absolute and set free from the representation of theidea. Thus Goethe's religious stand comes to reveal itself in an affinitive relationship withMahayana buddhism."11)These four underlined adjectives are precisely the characteristics of what tominagacalls metaphysics. They symnbolizes the second coming of transcendetal wisdom indige-nous to india, under the name of mahayana-praijna.〓n the other hand, Tominaga demonstrated his ability with the vitalizing power of thepen not only in his above-mentioned biographies of the buddha but also in his work ex-tracting the original lotus-sutra, free from posterior various annexes and insertions. hesupposed a khokke-proper〓 written by an anonymous bhikku, which he himself siftedfrom traditional lotus-sutra through the genetically moiphological way of Goethe ., i.e. asource. a genesis and its development. he regarded the traditional sutra, upon which pet-zold depended, as a sutra, which had lost its original type with the prajna-metaphysics, in-digenous to the indian thought. he criticized it, saying:As kant was astonished, mankind cannot be exempted from peculiar destinies, thathis most excellent representatives must die in the battlefields of metaphysics in vain,more than that, as long as men do not deceive themselves, they are not likely to havebelief, which makes confront against the invective of Mephisto, that their abuse of atheoretical function, i.e. reason, makes them more bestial than any other animal..Therefore, if overly intellectual theories bear peculiar destinies, which should end inmetaphysics, there comes to be no way for it but to get clear of this. if we observe inthis sense the achievements of ancient master minds (Socrates, confucius and buddha),even if their methods may be different, we should notice that they have the same wayof shaking themselves free from the human reason-centered theory. For a wonder,however, these master minds, all of them, have never given any methodological expla-
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesnations, so that hermeneutic commentaries in the past were likewise led into emptydeas to be reduced again to the metaphysics.121
we postpone tominaga's attack of an unknown, but a great problem, because of its im-portarce, until next time. the question, which has scarcely becone an issue even in the ac.ademic world of getman philology, is a deadlock, its new turn and the success of goethe'sFausf in his latest vears.Now we will introduce tominaga's incisive argumnent comparitg kant with the meta-physics of Mahayana, in which petzold put full confidence. The following is a passagfrom tominaga's early lecture on his so-called ,primordial lotus sztra.Kant organized critical philosophy, in order to recognize teason fightly. in doingso, he established reason die vernunft) on the subjective side and the thing-in-itself (dasding an sich) on the objective side. and by prescribing that these two extremes wereunrecognizable by our understanding (verstand), he fixed the limit of its possibility…Thus he faced antinomy on his way to both extremes..it is imnpossible to unite twonotions which oppose themselves against each other with the same value, into one. itisimpossible for kant to set reason, ie. subiectivity and the thing-in-itself, ie. obiectivi-ty, as opponents at the two extremes of a straight line and then unite them with the un-derstanding. on the other hand, contrary to kant, praina-thinkers such as nagarjunaand t'ie t'ai philosophers tried to unite the subiective and obiective…….Kant imade athorough investigation speculative in vestigation without doing away the understand-ing, and obtained the ideas of both reason and the thing-in-itself, which he prescribedas beyond our cognitive ability. as prajna thinkers regarded buddha's Enlightenmentas transcendental intelligence, they tried to identify Reality and its projection, with ego.They were, however, still on the speculative level. on the other hand the standpoint oflotus-sutra is not limited to mere speculation, which tries to contemplate the dhamma-Realities as they are, but rather penetrates such speculation, exhausting it exhaustively.In any case, if we pursue something absolute with our intelligence, we never fail to endup two extremes. consequently kant came to a deadlock at reason and the thing-in-it-self , and left them as they were, but the praina thinkers, while striving after the unity
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesof praina and Reality, were little removed from mere speculation, though they were ncmore than before in the long run.13)ln later days, tominaga indicated the darkness of this aporia ( the state of being at a loss)in traditional Mahayana thought, contrasting it with the clearness of the primordial lotusSutra. according to him, the difference of both is due to whether each had a surviving self-willedness or not.〓
lere we translate one passage from petzold's life-work4concerning t'ien-t'ai andGoethe" s theories on the identity of opposites.:In the light of the panentheism, we must understand the theory of the identity ofopposites. This is based on T'ien-t'ai philosophy and finds its expression in variousteachings which postulate the identity of individual spirit with the universe, the identityof the subiect with the obiect and the identity of the one with the all. This identity isconceived as direct absolute identity, not as direct relative identity, as an identity of thesame sort that goethe wrote upon in these lines:undes ist das ewig eineand itis the eternal oneness,das sich vielfach offenbartwhich reveals itself manifoldlyKlein das grobe, grob das kleine, Small is big, big is small,alles nach der eignen art all in its proper way…(to be continued)**
1)bruno petzold: goethe und mhayaa buddhismus (octopus/ wien1982(The cited english translated by kotani.)以下GMb2)ブルーノ・ペツオルト,小嶋昭道・喜里山博之訳『比較宗教学一ゲーテと大乗仏教』叡山学院,平成一二
3)小谷幸雄「佛教とゲーテーブルーノ・ペツオルトと富永半次郎の業績-『坂輪宣敬博士古稀記念論文集・仏教文化の諸相』平成二十,山喜房所収4)kotani Yukio: i The symbolism of hokke-proper(i) journal of indian and buddhist stu-dies vol51.no.1.dec.〓02.ii ibid. (〓 ibid. vol.55no.3 march07ii ibid (〓) ibidvol.6no.3 March85)asskrit-englihdictionaty, by monier-williams /oxford1899p.1120
The japanese association of indian and Buddhist studies6)d. anderseni apli Reader with noesnd glosassry, 2pats, copenhagen,19-1907.7)富永半次郎『正覺に就いて一釋尊の佛教-』釋尊の佛教刊行會昭和五九8)富水半次郎著,大野達之助・千谷七郎・諏訪紀夫・安用定男・風間敏夫編『釋迦佛陀本紀』昭和二五
9)GMb p107ff.10)GMbp.108ff11)GMBp.38
2)『一』誌・第參號法華方便品-十如章に縁つて-富永先生の會・昭和一87p.ff.
(3)富水半次郎『國體の信念附録・根本法華』第十三回見寶塔品,カント,ヘーゲル,禪筆録・編者横澤高記承謹會昭和一七(4)bruno petzold die quintessen der tien-ti (Tendai-) lere-ene komparative lntersu〓ung-,hrg. von horst Hammitzsch,1982, otto harrassowit/wiesbaden, S.287.key words) avidya-samskara, logos-tat, right or wrong of the prajna-metaphysics, vayadhamma samkhara(professor emeritus, rissho university )
