The ujapanese sSOciationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe Newly-discovered anbam shouyi jjing andYinchiru jjing t60Hung hung-lungIntroduction
The contents of the newly-discovered anban shouyi jing安般守意經(hereafter k-ab-sYj), which was compiled and reedited by an Shigao and discovered in Japan in1999,isquite complex and a formidable challenge for study. The structure of k-absYj was con-structed with the counting breath article of ig ddi jing t606修行道地經數息品(hereafter xxddjcba) and some contents from yinchiru jing陰持入經(hereafter ycrJ).regarding this argument, please refer to my recent papers1). the main purpose of this pa-per is to discuss the contents of the following three sections of k-abSYj 〓Four Fruits四果","Four abilities of Unhindered understanding and Expression四解依"and "pra-tyekabuddha辟支佛".Comparison of pancorambhagiyani samyojananiRegarding the section on "Four fruits2", from the thread, sequence of the contentsand special vocabulary used in the article we can infer that they were quoted from twoparagraphs regarding "si xing zhe fu四行者福"(cattari samannaphalani) iYRj3 and re-compiled. The meaning of "cattari samannaphalani" is the four merits achieved by the sra-vaka-yana practitioner. judging from the vocabulary used in these two sutras, we can pointto the time of translation of Ycrj as being earlier than that of the discovered k-abSY.The paragraphs depicting "the third fruit" (par.2) and "the fourth fruit" (ar.4) in k-ab-SYJ are especially similar to those in YcR (par.1 &par.3).Therefore we can infer thatthese two paragraphs in k-abSyj were quoted fromYrJ. Following are the descriptionsof "the third ffruit" from yr)(Par.1) and k-bY(par.2):Par.1「〓下五結已畢.〓何等為五.二為〓見身是非.為①解疑.三為〓不惑不貿戒.四為〓不望.五為⑨不〓.〓是為五結已畢.便得道弟子.⑦不復還世間.」
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt studiesThe newly-discovered anbam shouyi fing and yinchiru jfing 〓603(h. hung)(137par.2「阿那含名爲①不還世間.阿那含福爲何等.〓五下結已盡.〓何等爲五.〓貪欲,〓順志,〓見身,〓轉戒本願,爲〓疑.〓是五爲无有已.」Let us compare the descriptions regarding the third fruit from the original pali petako-pades'), YcRj and k-abSYj respectively as followspetakopadesaYR (par.1)k-abSYj (par.2)(a) pancorambhagiyani samyojanani pahinani bhavanti〓下五結已畢〓五下結已盡
(b)〓何等為五〓何等爲五(c)sakkayaditthi〓見身是非〓見身〔d) vicikiccha①解疑①疑(e)silabbataparamaso〓不惑不貿戒〓轉戒本願f)kamacchando〓不望〓貪欲(g)byapado⑨不恚〓愼恚(h) imesam pancannam orambhagiyanam samyojananam pahana〓是為五結已畢〓是五爲元有已①不還世間
(〓)anagami⑤不復還世間①不還世間From the above compatison, we can find that the paragraphs describing the third fruitfrom each of the petukopadesc, ycRj and k-abSYj are inter-correlated with each otherBut we also pick out that in ycRJ, there is an extra negative prefix, i.c. prior to or aftereach of the original five "non-virtue" fetters. the addition of a negative prefix such as "fei非(not)" or "fie解(unload)" or bu不(non-)", to each of the "five fetters" thus turns itsmeaning into a "virtue" . if we remove these negative prefixes, the original pali and the twoChinese paragraphs correspond exactly with each other. among them an shen shi fei(見身是非)means "to attach to the view of a self in the body is not right"" is the antonymof shen jian(見)which means to "attach to the view of a self in the body.regarding 〓ou wang(不望),we can say that an Shigao has translated the pali:" tattha katamam alobho kusalamulam Yamdhatuko alobho alubbhana alubbhitattam aniccha ap-atthana akanta anaiihosanam into the Chinese:・彼不貪清淨本為何等.為三界中不得不望不求り);The above quoted sentence means: 〓which is the purifying root of non-greediness? it
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS8)the Newly-discovered anba shouyi jing and ynchiru jjing t03(h. hung)is non-gaining, non-desiring and non-asking in the Three realms." Therefore, the meaningof "bu wang不望"is equivalent to that of "bu tan不貪".Comparisonof panca uddhambhagiyani samyoiananiFollowing are the paragraphs regarding "the fourth fruit" from Y(par.3) and〓-abSYj1)(par.4)par.3「令為〓解捨上五結.〓何等為五.一為〓色欲.為①不色欲.三為〓癡.四為〓惰慢.五為〓不解.已上五銜足.為已捨五結.〓無所著.」par.4「阿羅漢名爲⑪天所著.阿羅漢福爲何等.〓上五縛與盡.〓何等爲五上.〓色欲.①无有色欲.〓无有〓.〓驕慢.〓愚癡.」petakopcdescycr (par.3)K-abSYj (par.4.(a) panca uddhambhagiyani samyojanani pajahati〓解捨上五結〓上五縛與盡
(b)〓何等為五〓何等爲五上〔c) ruparaga〓色欲〓色欲(d) aruparaga①不色欲〓元有色欲(e) uddhacca〓癡〓元有〓(f)mana
〓橋慢
(f)mana〓檎慢〓驕慢〓驕慢
〓驕慢
(g) aviiia
(g) aviiia〓不解〓愚癡(h) araha
(h)araha〓無所著〓无所著From the above comparison between the one pali text, petakopades,and the twchinese texts, we cn point out that regarding the " the fourth fruits"", the contents froneach of the petakopadesa, ycrj and k-abSYj are corresponding with each other. butfrom the above comparison, we can find that the word e uddhacca" was translated into (〓chi癡(ignorance) inYrj, and into"〓wu you yin有〓"(non-desire) ink-abSYj.but within the remaining descriptions of the five coverings五蓋inYcrj, "uddhacca"was translated into terms "bu liao不了13)", so eitherin case e or〓,uddhacca was notproperly translated, and so the chinese translations of this term turned out to be various.Regarding gbu jie不解,we also find that there are two other cases in YCRj, where themeaning of "avijia" corresponds to the phrase "bu jie". the comparison is shown below14
The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesThe newly-discovered anbm shouyi jjing and yinchiru jjing . HunG)(139Tattha andhakaratimisa yathabhutam apajananalakkhana avijia1癡相為何等.為冥中見冥.如有不解10)comparisonoftini samyojananicomparing the descriptions about "the first fruit"" between Ycad petakopade-〓 below, we can learn the following. The three fetters (tini samyojanani pahiyanti) cut offby "first fruit" have been clearly indicated as : the first one: "zhi shen fei shen知身非身'(sakkayaditthi). which means to detach the attachmnent to the view that there is a real self inthe body and the mind, the second one "wu yi無疑"(vicikiccha) means no-suspicion, andthe third one "bu mao yi xing jie不貿易行戒"(sulabbataparamaso) means detaching theview of attachment to discipline. These three chinese terms were added the prefix of"非"を無"or〓不",comparing with it's pali terms respectively.「彼為應得道迹云何?已諦相應道弟子.便斷三縛結.彼為三縛結為何等.一為知身非身二為無疑.三為不貿易行戒.」Tattha sotapanno katham hoti? saha saccabhisamaya ariyasavakassa tini samyojanani pahiyantisakkayaditthi vicikiccha silabbataparamaso ca,but from the text in k-abSY9, we can find the explanations regarding "three fet-ters" as below:得道迹名爲須陀〓.得道迹福爲何等.若從行見應斷斷三結.何等爲三地獄,畜牲,餓鬼.Fromthe above text. we can see that the three fetters三結mentioned here are differen1fromn the ones in YcRJ and have changed to "di yu地獄"(hell ), "chu sheng畜牲"(ani-mal), "e gui餓鬼"(hungry ghost).an Shigao purposely ignored the regular expression "sanjie" (three fetters), and used the term of three kinds of evil path instead. obviously, theseterins ate plain and easier for people to understand, but this kind of statement has turnedthe explanation into the s-called taoist buddhism" style. therefore, it is not possible thatthis paragraph is translated from an original Indian text. besides, we find that one para-graph of "fo shuo chu chu fing 730佛説處處經",contains the content of the fourFruits. words and phrases of the paragraph have a distinctive style, and very close to thoseof k-abSYJ. they have probably been quoted from the new discovered k-abSYJ.
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesthe newly-discovered an shouyi jing and yinchiru jing h. hunG)者疑意結.(17.528a18-20)Analysis of catasso patisambhidaRegarding "si jie yi四解依"(catasso patisambhida or four abilities of unhindered under-tanding and expression) in k-bSYj, prior to the paragraph on the " four fruits" there is aparagraph about "si jie yi四解依41)".from the contents, we can infer that: "fa jie法解22)" is equivalent to "fa wu ai jie法無礙解23)" which was later used by xuzangand "li jie利解24)"to "yi wu ai jie義無礙解"," fen bie tou jie分別投解"to "ci wu aijie詞無礙解",and "bian cai bo jie辯才博解"to "bian wu ai jie辯無礙解".paragraph" fa jie" and "li jie" contains the contents of the five aggregates, which also appeared fre-uuently in the earlier part of this text. but the terminological usage of the five aggregateshere seldom appears in the other works ofan Shigao. Except for the term "se yin zhong色陰種"appearing up once in o di ing,the rest of the terms such as "tong yang yirzhong痛痒陰種""si xiang yin zhong思想陰種""sheng si yin zhong生死陰種"and"shi yin zhong識陰種"are not found in Shigao's other works. but in ycri we canfind that the same paliterm rupakkhandho has been translated into either "se yin色陰26)or "se zhong色種〓7)".such dual usage cases of the five aggregates also appear in others o〓n Shigao's works. therefore, we can infer that the word "yin"or " zhong" used in "se yirhong", "tong yang yinzhong", "si xiang yin zhong", " sheng si yin zhong" and "shi yinhong" all point to one thing: "khandha". it means that "yin zhong" is a duplicate transla-tion from the same pali word8).we also find that in buddhist canons,no matter they areMahayana or Theravada, they never explicitly mention their connection with "five aggre-gates"" in their definition of "si wu ai jie四無礙解".therefore it is very possible that thecontents of the "five aggregates"" in these two paragraphs were added by an Shigao him-self. in my recent research,i have discussed the reason why an Shigao repeatedly men-tions the "five aggregates" so frequently. besides, we can find the following sentence
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe newly-discovered anbcn shouyi jing and yinchiru jing 0(h. Hung)(141)which describes the contents of "fen bie tou iie分別投解""若陰若行若入,若從正,起非常者苦者空者非身者,當從是已斷7,30,Itis likely that part of this sentence also originates from Ycr1).the word "xing行"could be mistaken for "shi持",The comparison between its chinese version and pali〓xis shown below. The phrase "yin chi ru陰持入"means five aggregates, eighteerfields and twelve bases.Tattha yo imesam khandhanam dhatu-ayatananam彼以有是陰亦持亦入
comparing the two related sentences below from Ycr3)and petakopadesa4),wean find that the so-called "cong zheng)(following the right wisdom) is corresponding tosammadania.
khinasavo vusitava sammadanna vimutto已度世無有漏.已竟.從正得解〓Furthermore, the phrase "fei chang ku kong fei shen非常苦空非身"-aniccam duk-kham sanna anattati-is found a total of six times in Ycrj, and we can also determminethat yi duan已斷"is equivalent to pahanain pali.Tattha nataparinna nama aniccam dukkham sanna anattati, esa nataparinna. pahanaparinna panachandaragappahana, esa pahanaparinna (petakopadesa從慧解知為何等.為非常苦空非身.是為從慧知.從斷知為何等.愛欲已斷是為從斷知(〓crj37)).
within the buddhist canons of both Theravada and mahayana, regarding the subiect ofici wu ai jie"", we have not yet seen any explicit statement related to "khandhanam dlhatu-ayatananam" or " aniccann dukkham sanna anattati". tTherefore we can infer that this part ofthe above paragraph is quoted from YcrJ. Finally, let us look into the contents of thefourth paragraph38 from the end of this text, i.e. the paragraph just before the last threeparagraphs, each one starting with the phrase "shi yun師云"(the master said),卅二相薄.不精進.半行.不竟佛相.不與佛等.故辟支佛.
The  uapanese sSociation ofIndian and BuddhiStStudiesThe newly-discovered anm shouyi jfing and yinchiru ing . hung)in the "chu chu jig處處經"〓730,there is a sentence "fo zhe wei tong xing佛者為通行",which means "the buddha had done all the full practice". "Tong xing通行"carbe described as the comparative term of "ban xing半行40),which means the pratyekabud-dha has only done half of the practice of a buddha, Shigao has only mentioned the term"pratyekabuddha" one time each in another two sutras1respectively. The term "an shi erxiang三十二相"(32kinds of countenance) does not appear in any of the other texts trans-lated by him. From the two paragraphs of chu chu jing, we cannot infer the nature of therelationship between chu chu jing and k-AbSYJ. but it indirectly offers more evidencethat the content of k-abSYjitself is surely a work of an Shigao.conclusion
From this paper we can once again prove that the chinese version k-abSYj is not atranslation from any original Sanskrit or pali text, but was commpiled by n Shigao, whofollowed the structure of xxddjcba and refered to his knowledge of Sarvastivadinabhid-harma buddhism, such as the theory of anapanasati, and quoted many contents directlyfromyRJ. but the k-abSYjitself is really a work of n Shigao.<Key words)an shigao, anban Shouyi jing, Yinchiru jing, original version(Assistant Professor of dharma drum buddhist college, taiwan)
