on the "lost"(*antarhita) Sutras in the vyakhyayuktIn relation to the proof of the authenticity of the Mahayana TeachingsHorui toshio
1. IntroductionIn the vyakhyayukti (vyy), Chapter 4, Vasubandhu defends the authority of theMahayana as buddhavacana, or the buddha's word. Among the many arguments be.tween vasubandhu and the opponent (Sravakayanika) delineated therein, we find anargument about the "lost" (hidden, *antarhita) sutras or scriptures, in which Vasubandhuargues that not all the buddha's words are transmitted in the Sravakayana tradition(as in the Mahayana tradition). This discussion, however, seems to be merely a criti-cism of the incompleteness of the sravakayana canon, and the role it plays in theproof of the authenticity of the Mahayana teachings appears unclear.In this connection, it is to be noted that honio (1989) has made a great contribu.tion to the study of the proof of the authenticity of the Mahayana teachings becausehe not only points out that the arguments about the authenticity of the Abhidharmasastras as the buddha's word have similarity to the proof of the authenticity of theMahayana teachings as the buddha's word, but has also provided plenty of informa-tion about the works dealing with this topic. Thanks to his study, the fact was re.vealed for the first time that the argument about the "lost" sutras is found in a simi-lar form in the Mahavibhasa, VyY,Tarkaivalat, and Nyayamusara (Na).Subsequently, otake (2003)pointed out that in the ru dasheng lun入大乗論(here-after RdL), the criticism of Ananda, which constitutes the main part of the theory ofthe "lost" sutras, is found in a form similar to the vyY.In this paper, I shall take up the argument about the "lost"(*antarhia) sutras inthe vyY, focusing on the criticism of Ananda, and elucidate the role this discussionplays in the course of the disputes in the vyY and in the proof of the authenticity ofthe Mahayana teachings as the buddha's word by comparing it with similar discus-
sions found in the TJ and rdl.2.The "lost" sutras in the vyYThe following argument is conducted between Vasubandhu and the opponent (ie.Sravakayanika: st) in the first half of the vyY, Ch.4(96b7ff., pll3a8ff): [Sr] TheMahayana (here, this Mahayana refers to the prajnaparamitasutra or *sarvadharmanihsvabhava ["selflessness of all elements" theory]) is not buddhavacana because it contra-dicts the well-known buddhavacana. [vVasubandhu) l]In that case, the bud.dhavacanas well-known to you (ie., sravakayanika) cannot be buddhavacana becausethey [contain teachings that] are mutually contradictory. [Sr2]There are * nitarthasuitras (scriptures of definite meaning) in the sravakayana by which such [seeming.contradictions are resolved(among the contradictory teachings, one is mitartha and theother is neyartha [in which the meaning is not to be taken literally], and thus the [seeming]contradictions are resolved). on the other hand, there are no nitortha sutras in theMahayana [by which the contradictions between the sarvadharmanihsvabhava theo-ry and the other Mahayana teachings are resolved].In reply to this criticism from the opponent (Sravakayanika), Vasubandhu, referringto the "lost" suitras, answers as follows (vyY,D97bff., pll4bff.) [vYou cannot as-sert that there are no nitartha sutras in the Mahayana simply because they are noseen nowadays [since many sutras have been "lost"(*amtarhia) in the Mahayana].Likewise, many sutras have been lost in the sravakayana. Next, (l) Vasubandhu re-fers to the "lost" sutras in the Sravakayana. (a) he first cites a verse listing thenames of l4sutras which show that some of the buddha's teachings were lostl) (thecore part of this section is a criticism of Ananda to which I refer immediately below).(b)Then, he cites some passages from the above-mentioned 14sutras. (c) Further, hecites two more sutras.(2)vasubandhu refers to the diversity of the*ahaparinirvanasutra. finally, (3) he mentions the loss of the original recitatior(*milasamgiti-bhramsa).After this, many arguments are given in the vyY, and at the beginning of the lat-ter part of Ch.4(vyY, d105b6ff., p123bff.), Vasubandhu insists that there are nitarthasutras in the Mahayana and cites some verses from the samdhinirmocanasutra(SNS) and lankavatarasutra (lAS)
Among the above discussions, let me mention again vasubandhu's criticism ofananda (the first part of[v2](1)b),2)the outline of which is as follows:diagraml: The criticism of ananda in the vyY(based on the* ultiarasitra and *nnanda.sutra)
In summary, vasubandhu criticizes ananda because he did not receive most olthe buddha's word before he became the buddha's attendant. but there is a problemthis criticism of Ananda was introduced in the context of defending the opponent'scharge that "there are no nitartha sutras in the Mahayana" to prove that we cannoconclude that there are no nitartha sutras (ISr ll above). it is true, in this sense, thathis argument simply seems to be a criticism of the sravaka, and Vasubandhu seemsto be admitting that there are no nitortha sutras in the Mahayana. howevervasubandhu certainly argues in the latter part of ch.4of the vyY that there are ni-tartha sutras in the Mahayana. Thus, the position of the discussion about the "lost"(*antarhita) sutras ([v2]above) seems to be curious in the context of the vyY, andthe role this discussion plays in the proof of the authenticity of the Mahayana teach-ing as the buddha's word is unclear.3)Now, let me elucidate the role that this argument about the "lost" suitras plays inthe vyY.(1) First, I shall examine this argument from a structural point of view. Asmentioned above, Vasubandhu answered the criticism of the opponent (Sravaka) that"there are no nitartha sutras in the Mahayana" by pointing out that not all theBuddha's words are recited in the Sravakayana. The neyartha teaching (in whichmeaning is to be taken literally) was, in the vyY, the prajnaparamitasutra or the sar-vadharmanihsvabhavata teaching advocated in this suitra. in this sense, thePrainaparamitasutra or its teaching seems to have been familiar to the sravaka atthat time. Nitartha sutras such as the SNS (and LaS), on the other hand, can be saidto have been "lost" for the Sravaka since they were not known to the sravaka. (〓nthis connection, it is worth noting that vasubandhu, when he cites the nitariha sutras, criti-
cizes the opponents for insisting that "there are no nitartha sutras in the Mahayana" becaustthey are not erudite [thos pa nyung bd][vyY,d105b, p123b].) Thus, the "lost" sutras, in-cluding both the "lost" sravakayanika agamas and the Mahayana suitras such as theSNS, are similar in the sense that both are unknown to the Sravaka (but were surelytaught by the buddha). we can thus understand the position of these "lost" sutras inthe vyY as follows: this argument about the lost sutras indirectly refers to the un."lost" nitartha sutras such as the SNS by illustrating that all the buddha's wordswere not transmitted in the sravakayana tradition. (2) Secondly, as I show in the fol-lowing section, the criticism of Ananda plays an important role in the proof of theauthenticity of the Mahayana teachings and seems to be suitably placed in the dis-cussion in the VvY.3. The criticism of Ananda and the Proof of the Authenticity of theMahayana teachings in the TJ and rdiIn this section, I shall take up the relevant discussions in the TJ. RdL, and NA andelucidate the role the criticism of Ananda plays in the proof of the authenticity ofthe Mahayana teachings.3.1.An outline of the corresponding discussions in the TJis as follows (Tj, d166a2ff.p179b8ff ; the numbers below are provisional4)(1)The Mahayana also (i)enters into the Mahayana sutras, (〓i) is found in the700*siksapada for the bodhisattva, and (ii) does not contradict the * dharmata of theteaching of emptiness( *nyata ).(2)ananda was not the reciter of the Mahayana:the Mahayana was recited by the original reciters such as* Samantabhadra,*Manjusri, Guhyakadhipati,* Maitreya, and so forth.(3) Citation of 16sutras (begin-ning with the ulttarasitra and inandasutra, very similar to the vyY mentioned above).As is obvious from the above outline, the argument about the "lost" sutras is in-troduced in the context of the proof of the authenticity of the Mahayana teachingsas the buddha's word in the tJ. The Tj, after maintaining that the reciters of theMahayana teachings are different from the reciter of the sravakayana (Ananda), in-troduces the argument about the "lost" sutras in which criticism of Ananda consti-tutes the core part.3.2.An outline of the corresponding discussions, including the criticism of Ananda.
82)〓n the "lost"(*antarhita) sutras in the vyakhyayukti (T. horiuc)in the Rdlt32:36cff.) is as follows:5)(1)citation of the anandasutra.(2) citation of the uttarasutra: There are mandharmaskandhas (aggregates of the teaching) which were not received by Ananda (cf.section l above).(3)citation of the suramgamasamadhisitra: little are the amountsof the dharmaskandhas received by ananda and large are those not received byhim.(4) Many sutras also state that Ananda did not have the capacity to receive theBuddha's teaching.(5) Ananda was not able to receive all the buddha's teaching.(6)[Objection] Ananda is said to have been the foremost *bahusruta (erudite). [Answer]Although he is said to have been the foremost * bahusruta, this is among thesravakas, and bodhisattvas are not taken into account.As is shown by the above synopsis, the Rl criticizes Ananda for not having re.ceived many teachings of the buddha, and by doing so, the rdl situates theMahayana sutras as the buddha's word that was not received by ananda, the recitelof the sravakayana canon. in a word, the criticism of Ananda is an argument whiclmakes it possible for the Mahayana to be the buddha's word which was not receivedby him.
〓.3The "lost" sutras in the NA(T29:604cll-605a23)6)Sanghabhadra's(衆賢)nyayanusara (na) citesl2suitras common to the vyY inthe context of defending the 98anusaya, or the "impressioned tendency" theory, asthe buddha's word. As the nA is considered to postdate the vyY,7)what is to benoted here is that the nA does not cite the* uitarasutra and *anandasutra and therelevant criticism of Ananda as found in the vyY.4. ConclusionIn this paper, i have elucidated the position of the argument about the "lost"(*-iarhita) sutras in the VyY by investigating the context of the vyY itself. At the sametime, I have pointed out that the criticism of Ananda in the vyY plays an importantrole in the proof of the authenticity of the Mahayana teaching as the buddha's wordby taking account of the corresponding arguments in the TJ and rdl.<Abbreviations> NA: Sanghabhadra, Nyayanusara, t291562,rLu dasheng lun入大乗論):t32.1634,SA: Samyuktagama, t: Taisho canon; t tarkajvala, Dno.3856,P Nc
on the "lost"(*atarhita) Sutras in the vyakhyayukii (t. HORIuch)(83)5256.;vyY vasubandhu, vyakhyayukti, d no.4061,p No.5562.<Notes)l) the original Sanskrit names of the 16sutras which show that some of thBuddha's teachings have been lost are variously posited (cf. peter Skilling, "vasubandhuand the vyakhyayukii literature," journal of the international association of buddhislstudies23-2[2000],297-350;peter verhagen, "Studies in Indo-tibetan buddhist hermeneutics(4) The vyakhyayukti by vasubandhu," journal asiatique293-2[2005].559-602)However, as has been done by honio ("Shakkiron daiyonsho-Seshin no daiio bussetsuron," kobe joshi daigaku kiyo bungakubu-hen-[19901,57-70),by consulting studies ofthe NA and tj, some of the corresponding names of the sutras in the vyY become clear.Here, I shall add some information about some of the names of the l6sutras. l* uitara:2*Tnanda;3:*bhaddali,4 duhkhaskandha,5*bhumia;6:* udayin;7 Sunyata;8〓hu ls skyes; 9:*purna, 10*Gopaka, l: chu shing,12.*parinirvana;13:*rastrapal;14:'gro ba,15: Tusni(mbhava),16 vihara. The Tibetan rendering of the name of the 5thsutra in the vyY is Sa o(gyi mdo). As this sutra corresponds to SA343(T294a)浮彌経,sN12.24,25(vol.i,32-41)bhimijia, this Sa son is assumed to be a translationof * bhumi (), and the corresponding name in the Tj also supports this assumptionT,Dl67a4,pl8la2: sa pdi mdo).on the other hand, in the NA we find the name他経,butthis passage in the NA should be emended from taing他経(*anyasitra) to diing地経(*bhumiia)sutra; cf. korai dizokyooyo shuppansha,1974], vol.30:688bl3:地経).Asfor the names of suitras 9,15,and 16, see horiuchi ("Shakkiron ni okeru onmotsukyo noriron," Tohogaku ll[2006b],77-6(l)).2)cf. Horiuchi, op cii.3)cf. jose gnacicCabezon, "vasubandhu's vyakhyayukti on the authenticity of the Mahayana sutras" (irJ. timm, ed., traditional Hermeneutics in South a [Albany: SuNY press, 1992],221-243),240,n.2"from this it seems that this is a subiect that vasubandhu felt was im-portant to treat in its own right, so that despite the fact that he had much easier rebuttal tothe sravaka objection available at this point."4)This section of the TJhas becn partltranslated and examined by Ejima Ekyok to chugan [Shunjusha,2003],439-447),etc.,while part of the NA has been translated by Akanuma chizenkokuyaku issaikyo [lndosenjutsu-bu], bidon-bu29[1934]). but it was Honjo yoshifumi ("Abidatsuma bussetsurorto daijio bussetsuron-hossho, onmotsukyo, mitchi,"ibk38-1[1989],(59)-(64))whofound that the vyY contains discussions similar to the TJ and NA.5)cf. ui hakuju.Hoshoron kenkyzlwanami Shoten, 1959,otake Susumu, "Nyu daijo ron no in'yo Agon,"IBk52-1(2003),(130-(133).6)Akanuma, op. ci.,172-174.7)cf. Horiuchi ("juni-bunkyo kYugagyoha ni okeru sutra, avadana, vaipulya, upadesa kaishaku," bukkyobunka kenkyi ronshu1[2006a],3-28).(Key words> Vyakhyayukti, tarkajvala, Nyayanusara,入大乗論,buddhavacana(Graduate Student, Tokyo university)
