The Vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the amrta distributionand its Exploitation by the pusa chutai jing's AuthorsElsa LEGITTIMOIntroductory notesThe present paper discusses the means employed by the authors of the pusa chutaijiing for conferring an altered message regarding events and motives that occur inthe vimalakirtinirdesa. it further includes a comparative study on the asta-vimoksaconceptin relation to food or drink.Whereas the vimalakirtinirdesa, the key topic of this year's congress of theJapanese Association of indian and buddhist Studies, is still at the crest of its famethe pusa chutai jig The Sutra heldby the bodhisattva wiihin the womb菩薩處胎經)1belongs to a once influential and now forgotten genre of Buddhist literature.2) justbefore entering nirvana the buddha recalls in this sutra the very first exposition heheld in his mother's womb and creates a great womb palace for his auditors. A cer-tain parallelism exists with vimalakirti's empty house or sick-room that accommodates a huge assembly.The vimalakirtinirdesa's chapter nine, the "nirmitabhojananayanaparivarta"("Thechapter on the created/fictive food's provision"),)focuses on the amria (sweet dew甘露.given by Sugandhakuta tathagata to the golden-colored fictive bodhisattva sent tothe Sarvagandhasugandha universe by vimalakirti. The main heroes of this play arevimalakirti, his fictive bodhisattva who brings back the precious food, ancSugandhakuta Tathagata. The amrta is distributed to the beings of this world with-out Sakyamuni buddha's personal interventionChapter four ( "The buddha tree"佛樹)of the pusa chutai jing relates to theseevents in its final section on the special powers (rddhi-pada神足)the buddha ac-quired as a bodhisattva: l) eye (divya-caksus),2) ear (divya-srotram),3) nose4)
The vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the amria distribution andits Exploitation by the pusa chuiai jing's Authors (E. legittiMo)4)mouth,5)and5)bodily power. between the third and fourth power exists arapparent chapter closing: twelve yoianas of living beings become awakened and askto be reborn in the gandhasugandha buddhaksetra(香積佛刹)6)under the "moutlpower" the text then states:From jambudvipa up to the eighteenth heaven, everybody sees the Tathagata eating. Thebodhisattvas of the first stage up to the forth stage perceive the Tathagata's body's lapislazuli throat. The bodhisattvas of the non-returning (avaivartika/anagamin不退轉)stageup to the ninth stage perceive the strong and the ailing ones. The heavenly beings pick upthe tathagata's food, give it to all the other worlds, and there carry out buddha-activities(buddha-karya佛事).this is the retribution of the tathagata's mouth power. The tathagatashows the food's taste, the taste of tastes (rasarasagrata次第味味),7)the unmovable tastethat is neither swallowed nor chewed. while lifting up the food towards his mouth theTathagata concentrates his mind on thinking that the sentient beings of the five destiniesin the ten directions, and all the other beings, shall likewise experience this taste. when hethinks of them they all become full and satisfied. like monks reaching the ninth dhyanastage whose minds are soft, beautiful and satiated. This is the bodhisattva mahasattva'spure and calm mouth power."8)Another relevant passage is found in the sutra's chapter eleven "Felicity" amumodana隨喜).The buddha has a golden body(金體)and holds an exposition for usnisa-raia(頂王)bodhisattva of the "Safe dwelling world"(安住世界):By his divine powers the buddha then transforms the trisahasra-mahasahasra lokadhatu(one-billion-worlds) into shiny golden color. he makes those in the meeting see the worldof joy where the bodhisattvas are sitting on seven-treasure lotus flowers. Their disciplesand retinue are all in golden color. They feed on meditation hyana) and release [and tak4t]as their food and drinks.9)The pusa chutai iing's authors took over several themes and narrations from theVimalakirtinirdesa. but they eclipsed the principal "heroes" and Sakyamuni buddheis the sole "hero" responsible for the creation of golden-colored bodhisattvas. hisfood, respectively the satiating taste of it, is telepathically distributed fromJambudvipa to the beings of all the other worlds.〓i. an analysis of the asta-vimoksa conceptin relation to food or drinkwithin the chinese canon the concept of the eight-fold liberation sta-vimoksa八解
its Exploitation by the pusa chutai jing's Authors (E. legIttiMo)円The vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the amria Distribution and〓)is seen in simile-like relation with: the eight-fold path, meditation, nirvana, th〓x abhijna powers, water of release, a pond, or something eatable or drinkableThis last combination is of significance for the topic of this paper. The few scrip-tures containing this theme can be classified into two categories: l) the three ver-sions of the vimalakirtinirdesa0)and three vimalakirtinirdesa commentaries,11)and 2) three texts translated by Zhu FonianThe simile like picture of the asta-vimoksa concept in relation to food appears twic.in the vimalakirtinirdesa: in chapter three ("sravakabodhisattvavisarjanaprasna", "Thesravakas' and bodhisattvas' refusal to question[vimalakirti]") and in chapter nine.In chapter three the buddha tells his worthy disciples to make a visit tvimalakirti and to inquire about his health. one after the other, they refuse withreference to their past encounters and discussions with the virtuous man. EvelKasyapa refuses and explains that vimalakirti had once criticized himHonorable Mahakasyapa, if you can without overstepping the eight depravities concentrateon the eight liberations, if through the equality of the depravities you penetrate the equal-ity of holiness, and if by this single rice ball, you are able to satisfy all the beings and tcmake offerings to all the buddhas and all the holy beings, only then you should eat yourself. The one who eats in this way is neither soiled nor non-soiled, neither concentrated.nor out of concentration, neither in transmigration, nor fixed in nirvana.!2)In chapter nine the assembly is at vimalakirti's place. when the discussions on thebodhisattvas' entry into the doctrine of non-duality (dvaya) end, sariputra worriesabout their lunch. vimalakirti reading his mind tells him:Honorable sariputra, the tathagata taught the sravakas the eight-fold liberation. Youshould adhere to it and should not listen to the dharma with thoughts related to materialhings. however, if you want to eat, wait a moment, and you will eat food you have nevetasted before.!3)The set of texts translated by Zhu Fonian includes: the antarabhavasutra The Sutraon the intermediate-state, zhong yin jing中陰經),4)the pusa chutai jing and theEkottarika-agam (Zng yia han jing増壹阿含經)15)In the antarabhavasuitra the motive appears in a poem of chapter six"The divinepowers", rddhi-pada神足)spoken in praise of Subuddhi Tathagata
The vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the amrta distribution andits Exploitation by the pusa chutai jing's Authors (e. legittiMo)after having stayed for a long time hungrily and thirsty on the path, they drink by meansAmong the devas and humans he is the most honored one without comparison.his light illuminates the sentient beings.of the eight-fold release.16)In the pusa chutai jing the particular combination is found at the end of chapter ten("Permanence and impermanence" mitya-anitya常無常)in a poem expounded by theBuddha:
Through the eight-fold liberation [i, the buddha show/produce] the tasty juice of the sweedharma-dew(甘露法味漿)making those who are thirsty and desirous to feel fully satis-fied in an unthinkable way (acintya)17)In the pusa chutai jing and the antarabhavasutra the metaphor appears in verses o1passages that are only loosely linked to narrative contents. Among Zhu Fonian'stranslations only the ekottarika-agama sets the combination into a specific context:once, the buddha and his disciples made their begging tour through a certainBrahmin's village, but did not obtain any alms, because Mara had told the villagersnot to give anything to the sramamas. At that time the buddha expounded the won-derful teaching on the nine things or concepts which should be considered as food.one of these is the food of the eight-fold liberation.18)In this light the passages of the vimalakirtinirdesa appear as reminiscences ofthese events. The authors of the pusa chutai jing and the Antarabhavasutra wereeither influenced by the ekottarika-adgama or by the Vimalakirtinirdesa. of somesignificance might be the fact that while the motive in question is employed forSugandhakuta in the Vimalakirtinirdesa and for Subuddhi tathagata in theAntarabhavasutra, the ekottarika-agama and the pusa chutai iing use it forSakyamuni buddha.The Pusa chutai jing points to conservative counter-currents. The discussednotives and events help support its authors' Sakyamuni-centered worldview. Theirsopying procedures were motivated by their wish to correct passages they thoughtwere diverging from their faith. The Tathagata's amria distribution is one out ofnumerous examples found in the pus chutai jing that clearly show an effort torestore the buddha sakyamuni's omnipotence. The present paper is only a particularcase study. Further important motives and themes, for example from the lotus
The vimalakirtinirdesa's narration on the amrta distribution andits Exploitation by the pusa chutai jing's Authors (E. legittiMo)(55sutra, underwent similar transformationsBibliography
LAMottE, etienne, l'nseignement de vimalakirti (vimalakirtinirdesa), 1987, Louvain-la-neuve.
LeGittiMo, elsa i., Anaysis of the pusa chutai jing菩薩處胎經(t12,no.384, Inter-national college for postgraduate buddhist Studies, Phd thesis,2006,tokyo. (publica-tion planned in the series Melanges Chinois et bouddhiques of the institut belge desHautes etudes chinoises, bruxelles, in)〓vakeA, transliterated Sanskrit Text collated with tibetan anaChinese translations, ed. by the study Group on buddhist Sanskrit literature, TheInstitute for comprehensive studies of buddhism, taisho university, Tokyo,2004.〓
1)cf. tl2,no.384,p. 101524-158b25.2)on the basis of internal as well as external evidence l showed in my doctoral thesis(cf. leGittiMo,2006)conducted on this sutra, that it is not a chinese composition ancwas translated around the year 400Adby Zhu Fonian(佛念).3)cf. tEkeSA,2004,p.354-389.For the vimalakirtinirdesa'sFrench translation cf. lAMottE,1987.4)This power probably bases on the concept of the pureness of the nose (ghranaparisud-dhya鼻淨)
5)The passage also refers (with some distinctive deviation) to the first syllables of theARapcANA syllabi, cf. tl2,p.1027-1022c36)cf. tl2, no.394,p.1022c8.7)one of the thirty-two laksanas of a buddha8)cf. tl2, no.384,p. 1022c24-1023a3.9)cf. tl2, no.384,p.103225-2810)cf. tl4, no.474,p.522a, and p.532a, tl4, no.475,p.450a-b, and p.552a, and tl4,no.476,p. 56lc-562a, and p.579a11)The three commentaries are the weimo fing yii維摩經義記(T85,no.2769,p. 34lc),the jingming jing jijieguanzhong shu淨名經集解關中疏(T85,no.2777,p.487b) andthe jinming jing guanzhong shichao淨名經關中釋抄(T85,no.2778,p.532b).12)cf. t vLkiiesA,2004,p.90-91,and Tl4,no.475,p.540b6-10,
13)cf. T VlkiiIeSA,2004,p.354, and Tl4, no.475,p.552a5-8.(4)cf. tl2,no.385. This sutra is presently investigated by Prof. Mark bLuM(publica-tion forthcoming).15)cf. the chinese Ekottarika-agama (2, no.125)although Gautama samghadeva is
lthe vimalakirinirdesgs narration on the amra pistribution andis explonuation by the pusa chul  Aunors ESuiboutiomnodentioned as the translato, the greatest part of the collection (or the whole) as we knoyi today is (silZhu Fonianis. terminological comparative inquries showed tha hChinese Ekotarika-agama contains a great number of formulas and expressions exclusivcly foundin works ranslated by Zhu Fonian. I plan to further investigate this topiin a study dedicated to the chinese ekotarika-agama. on this topic cf also MizuiKogen, 1956,p.41-90.16)cf. tl2, no.385,p. 1065-6.7)cf. tl2,no.384,p. 103221-22(8)cf. t2, no.125,p.772b(key words)初期大乗,空佛念,菩薩處胎経,vimalakirtinirdesa, asta-vimoksaPost-doctoral researcher at the international collage for Postgraduate studies新刊紹介
Compiled by M. YaMAzAkI and Y.ouSAkA本文473頁・定価35.50ポンドPali Text Society2006年
