Jaina's criticism of buddhist Theoryon stanzas15-19of PancastikayasamgrahaHotta kazuyoshi1. IntroductionPancastikayasamgraha (as) is one of the works of kundakunda, a famousscholar of the digambara-sect. This text is divided into three chapters (Chapter l=stanza l-11l, Chapter sza l12-161,and chapter sza 162-181)1). six substancesare discussed in chapter l, especially within stanzas 15-19,the modification and theidentity of reality are dealt with. Though Amrtacandra (about loth century), one ofthe oldest commentators of this text, has not mentioned the specific name of aschool as a disputant, Jayasena (about12th century) has interpreted these stanzas as acriticism of buddhist theory.tThis paper aims to clarify the features of Jaina's discussion. For this purpose, thefocus is applied to stanzas 15-19,and the criticism of buddhist theory as seen inJayasena's commentary (Tatparyavrtti, tv). Then, the features of Jaina's discussiorwill be analyzed.2.discussion on Stanzas 15-19iTvbhavassa natthi naso natthi abhavassa ceva uppado/gunapajayesu bhava uppadavae pakuvvamti//l/Stanza 15of PAs denied the disappearance of existing things (bhava) and the oc-currence of non-existing things. it stated the occurrence and the disappearancemerely in the form of quality (guna) and mode (paryaya). tv has interpreted thisstanza as "refutation to an insistence of a pupil who follows buddhist theory2),calling the buddhist theory "one-sided with momentary (ksanika-ekanta)" And ac-cording to Amrtacandra's commentary (Tattvapradipika, tp)3),it has given an exam-ple in which milk (gorasa) is applied to existing things equalling substance (bhava=
dravya), butter (navanita) to a former mode, and ghee (ghrta) to the next mode. in ad-dition, two viewpoints ie. (viewpoint intended for substance) (dravyarthika-naya) and(viewpoint intended for mode) (paryayarthika-naya) have been introduced in order toavoid becoming extremism (ekantavada).bhava jivadiya jivaguna cedana ya uvaogo/suranaranarayatiriya jivassa ya pajiaya bahuga//manusattanena nattho dehi devo havedi idaro va/ubhayatta jivabhavo na nassadi na jayade anno//7/so ceva jadi maranam jadi na nattho na ceva uppanno/uppanno ya vinattho devo manusutti pajjao/l8/evam sado vinaso asado jivassa natthi uppado/avadio jivanam devo manusotti gadinamo//9/In stanza 16,soul (jiva) is described as an example of the existing things equal-ling substance while heavenly beings (deva), human beings (manusya), hellish beings(naraka), and animals (tiryanc) are described as an example of the mode. The contenof stanzas 17-19is almost the same as that in stanza 15,but the commentaries onthese stanzas are different based on the following points. TV on stanzas 17-18hasdenied not only "one-sided with momentary," but also "one-sided with eternal (ni-tya-ekanta)4)" and pointed out the fault of these standpoints.Although the commentary on stanza19has stated the examples of the bambocstick (venudanda) and of Devadatta, the latter is more important in this discussion.The meaning of that is as follows: when son is intended (vivaksa) against oneDevadatta, father becomes secondary, and when father is intended, then son be-comes secondary. Thus, he has explained that when the eternity is intended againstone substance, the momentariness as mode becomes secondary, and when the momentariness is intended, then the eternity as substance becomes secondary.3.the Features of the discussion invIn this chapter, the features of the discussion seeninv will be examined basedon three respects.3-1. setting of two extremismsJaina is based on the doctrine of manifold aspects ( anekantavada, non-extremism),
so when it criticizes other schools, the following method is often adopted. At firstthey consider the theory of other schools as extremism(ekantavada). Then, thoughthey admit the truth on one side, they explain the necessity of observation frommanifold aspects by switching their viewpoint. As a result, their theory includes alltheories, so they insist upon the excellence of their own opinion. two extremismssuch as X and Y will be set in an actual discussion, and such a method is used inthe criticism of buddhist theory as seen inTv.nv, the buddhist theory is called"one-sided with momentary" and considered as one extremism, and the Samkhyatheory is called "one-sided with eternal" and considered as another extremismMoreover, two viewpoints are applied as Jaina's one. Next, these two viewpointswill be examined.3-2.application of the two viewpointsThe two viewpoints in this discussion indicate <viewpoint intended fosubstance) (dravyarthika-naya) and (viewpoint intended for mode) (paryayarthika-naya)though there are various viewpoints in the naya theory of jaina. Application of thesetwo viewpoints aims at avoiding the two extremisms mentioned previously, i.e. theBuddhist theory called "one-sided with momentary" (ksanika-ekanta) and the samkhyatheory called "one-sided with eternal" (nitya-ekanta). An important point is, however,that the objects of the criticism are only being "one-sided" (ekanta) and not beingeternal (nitya) or momentary (ksanika) themselves. Jaina also has two viewpoints thatperceive both. Nevertheless, there is a difference from being "one-sided with mo-mentary" and "one-sided with eternal." They avoid becoming these extremisms byswitching the two viewpoints according to their intentions freely. to explain thisswitch in viewpoint application, TV has introduced the example of Devadatta. Thisexample shows the fact that humans also naturally switch the above mentionedviewpoints in daily life.3-3. problem and SolutionThe following problem remains even if the two extremisms are set, as mentionedabove, and the two viewpoints corresponding to them both are switched by inten-tions freely. different from buddhism, Jaina accepts the existence of eternal sub-stance, so their standpoint cannot help inclining to "one-sided with eternal" (nitya-ekanta). Though such a problem is not discussed in detail in the part concerned, a
possible solution is seen in jaina's substance-attribute theory that is mentioned be-fore stanza 15.in stanza 12,the inseparability of substance and mode is empha-szedvon stanza 18,the mutual dependence of substance and mode is statedas in stanza 12. Thus the suitability of both eternity and momentariness for singlesubstance is explained6).Ina word, he has interpreted that even if it is possible to divide the linguistic ex-pression and the viewpoint, substance and mode are inseparable. based on the bhe-da-abheda theory, he has interpreted that the momentariness of mode suits the eternal substance itself. Thus, Tvhas avoided becoming "one-sided with eternal."4. ConclusionWe have taken a general view of the criticism of buddhist theory inTv. and examined the features of Jaina's discussion as seen there. i want to refer to the remaining problem of whether kundakunda actually intended to criticize buddhist theor)or not. but it is very difficult to verify this problem. This is because the obiect ofthe criticism is not being specified by the author himself. Also, the name of a concrete text or person is never revealed in this text. So we must take a careful attitudeas much as possible towards the author's intention by referring to other texts as wellIn stanza8,Amrtacandra has said that the reality exists neither "as one-sided withaternity (sarvatha nityataya)" nor "as one-sided with momentariness (sarvatha ksanika-taya)7)" Therefore the interpretation as criticism of buddhist theory can go back tTP. but, we can see the declaration inTV as the criticism of buddhist theory for thefirst time.
Another important point is the historical background in which the commentarywas written. For example, Haribhadra of the Svetambara-sect (8th century2) has said"i do not side with vira, and do not hate kapila. The person whoever describes acorrect word should be admitted (paksapato na me vire na dvesah kapiladisu/ yukti-madvacanam yasya tasya karyah parigrahah/"lokatattva-nirnaya8).And he has de-scribed the theory of each school objectively and impartially in hisSaddarsanasamuccaya. however, an objective description has been lost and the the-ory of other schools came to be criticized in the Jaina doxography as the age de-scended.

Therefore, it is necessary to consider not only the style of commentary, but alscthe corresponding historical background in which the criticism of the other schoolsbecomes active.<Abbreviation>PAS
Assrimatkundakundasvamiviracitah pancastikayah tattvapradipika-tatparyavrtti-balavabodhabhaseti tikatrayopeth(srimadrajacamdrajainasastramala3),ed. byPannalal Baklival, Pandit Manoharlal, bombay, 1906〓pTattvapradipika of Amrtacandra〓vtatparyavrtti of Jayasena1)This division is based on Jayasena's commentary. in Amrtacandra's commentary theamount of stanza is 173,but in Jayasena's commentary 181. The division of chapter inAmrtacandra's commentary is as follows. chapter laza l-104,chapter 5-153,Chapter -173.2)tvp.33b,i/.2-4.)tpp.33a,l.8-p.34a, l.4.4)Tvp.37b.1.8-p.38b,lll. This theory is considered as the Samkhya theory by Jayasena.5)pp.28a, m/.2-3.6)Tv p.39b, m.l-5.7)tp p.19a,l.-p.20a,l.3.8)This text wanot able to be referred to. So the quotation is the one from Gunaratna's Tarkarahasya-dipika. cf. addarsana-samuccaya with Gunaratna's commentary tarkarahasyadipika (ed.by l.Suali, bibliotheca Indica, The asiatic Socicty, calcutta, 190,rpt.1986)p.l10,.1-17.louis de La vallee poussin "une Stance jaina et bouddhique" (journal Asiatique1911,Xv)pp.323-325.; Moritz winternitz, a history of indinliteratureil, (tr. by Mrs.S.Ketkar, university of Calcutta, calcutta, 1933,2nd ed1972),p.583,ml.3-21.9)Folxample, the theories of other schools have been criticized in Gunaratna's(15th century)commentary on Saddarsanasamuccaya (Tarkarahasyadipika). And Merutunga Suri (l4thcentury) has also criticized six darsanas (Bauddha, Mimamsaka, Samkhya, Naiyayika, va-isesika) in his Saddarsananirnaya. in addition to these, pancadarsanakhandana (authorunknown) has criticized darsanas other than jaina-darsana. cf. Collection of iai philo-sophical tracts (ed. by Nagin J. Shah, l.d.Series 4l, l.d.lnstitute of indology, Ahmed-abad, 1973)pp.l-11, pp.12-19.<key words> kundakunda, jayasena, ksanika-ekanta, nitya-ekantaGraduate student, university of Tokyo)
