journal of inin ad buddhist studies vol.55,no.3, March2007(103)Lokayata in tamilMIyaMOTO Jo
Abbriviation: LokaLokayata, Minimekalai1. IntroductionIn India the existence of Loka that holds to Materialism is well-known from theancient times. Their doctrine is always attacked by the orthodox hindus. buddhistsand Jains. although the name of Loka's book is known to us, it was lost and its en-tire doctrine was not handed down. other sects apart from loka, however, citedsome parts of its doctrine in their books in order to refute it. Through such citationsby other sects, we can depict the outline of Loka's doctrine again. various studie.on Loka have been done so far in order to reconstruct its entire doctrine.The doctrine of Loka was also cited in some books written in tamil by othelsects. based on the point that these citations are written by other sects from loka.we can not exclude the possibility that they may contain the exaggeration and themisunderstanding to a certain extent. The citations in tamil, however, have not beengiven serious attention on research about Loka. This article, therefore, will surveyon the citations about loka in tamil according to chronogical order and considerhow the situation of Loka was in Tamil aree2.manimekalai〓ani is a buddhist epic by cattanar in the sixth-eighth century. In the27th chap-ter of Mani, the heroine goes around many sects and listens to their doctrines. othat occasion, she goes to Loka and listens to its doctrinel). In this chapter, the nameof Loka is called putavati. This word2) means 'speaker about elements', namely ma-terialist. when this Putavati told the doctrine of his own sect to the heroine, he re-ferred the name of his sect as Lokayatan. in this mention, we can understand thaPutavati means Loka.Inani, any other materialists than loka are not mentioned. In the age of mani.
therefore, Loka must have been the only sect that holds to materialism.The main points of the doctrine of Loka in ani are as follows:・the name of the founder is Pirukarpati3).The number of the elements is not clearly shown but two types of element arementioned4).
・Means of knowledge is perception5).In some books, it is stated that Loka holds to hedonism. but in ni, there is nomention about hedonism of Loka.In many places of ani, the doctrines of buddhism are instructed. And furthermore, in the29th chapter the logic related to nyayaprevesa is taught. hence there isno doubt that the author of Mani had a detailed knowledge of Pali works and Indianphilosophy. in samannaphala-sutta of Pali, the doctrines of some materialists areexplained. Many researches point out so far that materialists in samannaphala-suttahas no direct relation with Loka. it is also informative that the author of〓animakalai, who must have knownpali works, did not give any name of material-ists in samannaphala-sutta.3.tiruvacakamTiruvacakam is a work of bhakti literature in the 9th century by Manikkavacakar,Saiva saint. In this work, the name of Loka was quoted very briefly without any de.tailed explanation6).based on this brief description, we can say that the audience ofTiruvacakam already knew about the existence of Loka very well. it is generallysaid that bhakti literature in Tamil is written in simple style for the common peo-ple's understanding. Loka was, therefore, famous among the multitude whenTiruvacakam was composed.4. Nilakeci
nilakeci is an anonymous Jain epic in the lth() century. This work is for thedebate. The heroine debates with other sects including buddhist, Samkhya, Aiivikaand so on and defeats them. on that occasion, she also debates with putavati. Thename of the sect is referred only as putavati. althogh the name 'Lokayata' is notmentioned, through the doctrine told by putavati, we can say that Putavati in thiswork is Loka.The character named picacikan speaks of the doctrine of Putavati in this work
There is no mention about the founder and the book of putavati either. And the her-oine claims that there is no founder or book for the putavati sect. The main pointsof the doctrine which is told by picacikan are as follows:・Rebirth. karma and God are denied.・the number of the elements is generally four in Loka's doctrine. inilakecihowever, putavati says that the five elements include earth, water, fire, wind andpace7). it is to be noted that this accords with the commentary on sad darsanasamuccaya of Gunaratna.・There is no mention about the hedonismIt is important that the character named picacikan appears in nilakeci. but thecharacter for Loka is indispensable to this work, in which the characters are debat-ing. Thus it is doubtful whether he really existed. picacikan means 'a man like de-mon' and Putam means 'a demon and an element'. it is inferred that Picacikan wasnamed after part of Putam's meaningCamayativakaravamana Munivar, the commentator of Nilakeci in the l6th centurydoes not mention about the actual state of Loka. he may have not seen loka beenpracitced.
The work of Nilakeci was written for the purpose of debate and demostrates thatthe author must have had profound knowledge of the doctrines of other sects. hencethe statement is worth believing. For example, in the debate with AiivikaOnpatuvamkatir is mentioned as the name of the book of Aiivika that is lost now8).5.civananacittiyar parapakkamCivananacittiyar is a basic philosophical work of Saiva Siddhanta by arunanti inthe l3th century. This work contains two parts parapakkam and cupakkam. Inparapakkam, the doctrines of other sects including Loka are discussed and refuted.〓arapakkam, there is no mention about the founder of Loka. The book of Lokais referred as the book which Indra's priest speaks of. Thus it is inferred that onlythe existence of book of Loka is known but the content of it is not.・Means of knowledge is perception. although there are six kinds of perception,it is not mentioned what six kinds they are・inference is denied.・The four elements include earth, water, fire and wind
・karma and God are denied.〓
In the books mentioned previously, there is no mention about the hedonismicalaspect of Loka. In parapakkam, however, it is strongly emphasized that Loka ex-tremely holds to hedonism. The verses (14-20)are spared for the descript of the he.donism. its description seems to be too exaggerated.The relation between arapakkam and sarva darsana sangraha by Madhava ispointed out by some researches. As for the doctrine of Loka, however, there is nosimilarity between them.6. vaishnava philosophical worksParamatapankam is a philosophical work written by Vedanta Tecikar in the l4tcentury. In this work, the doctrines of other sects are refuted. In the sixth chapter,the doctrine of Loka is examined in detail and refuted. The first verse of lokayatasutram written in Sanskrit, which was lost now, is cited in this chapter9). it is men-tioned that there is bhasyam to this lokayata sutram. The main points of Loka inhis work are as follows,・The elements include earth, water, fire and wind. it is said that space is alsoconsidered as an element.・Means of knowledge is perception'The founder is brhaspati.The52nd verse of iramanucanurrantati said that iramanucan refuted six sects. Inthe commentary of this work, pillailokacarya Jiyar in the 13-14th century showedthe names of these six sects that do not recognize the authority of veda. The nameof Loka is mentioned as Carvaka in his commentary.Such citations by vaishnava authors clearly show that they had the informationabout Loka.
7. parimelalakars commentary on tirukkural294Tirukkural is the most famous Tamil didactic work in the fifth-sixth centuryParimelalakar10) quoted the doctrine of Loka in his commentary on tirukkural294.The main points of the doctrine of Loka quoted by him are as follows;・The four elements include earth, water, fire and wind.・Means of knowledge is perception.〓
・karma and rebirth are denied
This statement is like the summary of the doctrine of Loka that is generallyknown.
8.conchusion
As stated above, loka was described by buddhists, Jains, Saiva and vaishnava iiTamil. In tamil area, therefore, the Loka and the name 'putavati' must have beerwidely known. The descriptions about Loka written in tamil, however, are so dif-ferent among each other. lt suggests that there was no written book of Loka inTamil. And in the books mentioned previously, there is no information about thevivid and actual state of Loka, so one can safely state that nobody has actually seenLoka being practiced in tamil area. although mani and Nilakeci belong to litera-ture in the most general definition, its authors, as stated already, must have so pro-found knowledge on philosophy. Thus we can trust its description and when re-earch on loka is conducted from hence, Loka in Tamil must also be fullyconsidered.
1)〓ani 27263-2872)lt derives from Sanskrit 'bhuta-vadin'.3)Mami 27:81.This name is not mentioned by putavati.4)InMmi 2726-270,the element with life which has knowledge and the element with-out life which has not knowledge are referred.5)Mani 27:2746)porrittiruvakaval56-57.7)nilakeci856-857.8)Milakeci 6719)atha lokayatam prthivyapastejo vayuriti tattvani tebhyascaitenyam kinvadibhyo ma-dasaktivat.
10)vaishnava commentator in the l4th century<Key words> Tamil, Lokayata(Graduate student, Tokyo university.
