On viinanaparindme in trimsikakarikaMATSUOka Hiroko0. In the first verse of his trimsikakarika (trk) vasubandhu states: atmadharmopacarhi vividho yh pravartate / vinanapariname su parinamah s c tridha trk1[L13.3-4]).This verse is well known as expressing the core of the Yogacara doctrineaccepted by vasubandhu. Thus, a correct interpretation of the verse is crucial to aproper understanding of Vasubandhu's doctrine. This paper will examine two interpretations of the verse: one commonly adopted by modern scholars, such as unebeand another put forth by the commentator sthiramati. in fact, Sthiramati anticipatesthe interpretation of modern scholars and presents an argument to reiect it. This ar-gument is also presented below.1.to begin with, let us see what unebe says.unebe[2004:137.6-131 "According to him(Sthiramati), the verse (pd abc) means thavarious verbal expressions such as "atman" or "iva" for human beings and "dharma" or"dyatana" for other constituents of this world are used among people (loka) as well as inhe scientific system (sstra), but they refer to the transformations of consciousness (vina-na-parinama) in reality and, therefore, they are mere secondary applications (upacara)"The important point to note here is that unebe takes viinanaparinama as the refer-ent of a verbal expression' (upacara). According to unebe[200:137.3-5],the ex-pression upacarah pravartate vinanapariname is a construction of the typesabdahpravartate arthe 'a certain word occurs in the domain of a certain meaning'.so that it means 'A verbal expression refers to vijnanaparinamd'.lt is debatable, however, whether the expression in questioncan be a constructionof the type described above. I think that it is difficult to establish a signifier-signif-icand relation between upacara as a verbal expression and vinanaparinama.2.1. Sthiramati introduces the following arguments made on the assumption that theterm upacara means a metaphorical expression
〓
ilt is not proper to have a metaphorical expression upacara) when there do not exist ai〓n and dharmas as primary referents (mukhya). For, a metaphorical expression musimeet three conditions: the primary referent of the word, the actual referent resembling theprimary one, and a common quality existing between the two." (trbh[L17.7-9])The point made here is this: Suppose that the word atman refers to the self whichreally exists. if the same word is used to refer to a thing which is not atman andsimilar to it, this use of the word atman is called upacara or secondary. In this caseit is also said that the word atman has two meanings: primary and secondary(gauna)
2.2.sthiramati denies such a distinction."There is also no primary referent for a word since the essence of that [i.e., the primarything] goes beyond the scope of thought(jnana) and language (abhidhana). For, it is onlyto grasp and to convey an [unreall secondary aspect (gunarupa) that a cognition and averbal expression occur, because they do not touch the essence of the primary thing. oth-erwise [a cognition and a verbal expression, which are related only to] an [unreall second-ary aspect, would become useless. Indeed, there is no means of determining the essenceof the primary thing other than a cognition and a verbal expression. Thus it is to beunderstood that there cannot be any primary referent since there is no cognition or verbalexpression to grasp or to convey it." (trbh[L17.23-27])sthiramati argues that a cognition and a verbal expression do not touch the very es.sence of a primary thing but its unreal secondary aspect, which amounts to sayingthat they do not occur with reference to the ultimate reality but to the conventionalreality. it is clear that he intends to imply here that the use of any word is second-ary (upacara), so that no essential distinction can be made between the use of a cer-tain word with reference to a certain thing and that of the same word with referenceto another similar thing.Thus we may say that to take the term upacara as meaning a metaphorical ex.pression as opposed to a primary expression carries us too far away from the origi-nal intention of Vasubandhu.3.1.we have to consider what Sthiramati states in his comments on the verse, tcsee how he understands Vasubandhu's statement atmadharmopacarah pravartate vijnanapariname."in that [vinanaparinama] tatra) there arise from storehouse consciousness (alayaviy-
nana) the conceptual cognition vikalpa) in which [a thing such as] aman (the self) appears (nirbhasa) and the one in which [aharmas (constituent factors of experience) suchs」 a material factor (rupa) appear, on the basis of the full development (pariposa) of theimpression vasana) left by the conceptualization of atman and the like and on the basisof the full development of the impression left by the conceptualization of a material factorand the like.although aiman and dharmas do not exist externally, there occur the conceptual cortruction upacara) of [such a thing as] atman and that of [such dharmas as] a materia.factor, which are beginningless, by means of thinking of the appearance of [a thing sucas] atman and the appearance of [dharmas such as] a material factor as if they were enti-ties outside the conceptual cognition, and clinging to them." Trbh[L16.2-6))Here it is pointed out that in the vinanaparinama there arise from alayavijnana theconceptual cognitions in which atman and dharmas appear and that when such con-ceptual cognitions are produced, the conceptual construction, which I think ismeant by the term upacara here, of atman and dharmas occur. Thus Sthiramatishows that the expression upacarah pravartate vinanapariname does not admit ofUnebe's interpretation.3.2.Then we have to determine exactly what is meant by the locative ending in theword vijnanapariname. Sthiramati says:"Moreover, [it must be said thatl when x does not exist in y then x is conceptually con-structed inyyc ca yatra nasti tat tatropacaryate); for instance, [when the cause for theuse of the word] go [does not exist in a bahika then] it is conceptually constructed in theBahika
Similarly, because atman and dharmas exist neither in the [transformation of] consciousness itself nor outside of it, atman and dharmas are just conceptual constructs (parikappita)and do not exist from the viewpoint of the ultimate truth (paramarthatas). Therefore, thene-sided view should not be accepted that as a cognitionvinana) exists as a real entity〓ravyatas), so also does something to be cognized (vineya).Since no conceptual construction can take place without a locus (adhara), it should nec-essarily be accepted that the vijnanaparinama, in which occurs the conceptual constructionof atman and dharmas, exists as a real entity (vastuias). Therefore, it is not reasonable tcaccept that as something to be cognized is simply conventionally real and not ultimateleal (samvrtitas), so is also a cognition. For, the undesirable consequence would follow
〓
that the cognition does not exist even at the conventional level. Indeed it is not proper tsay that a conventional reality has no basis (nirupadana)"rbh[L16.6-11])The point to note here is that the vijnanaparinama is described as the locus inwhich the conceptual construction of atman and dharmas occurs. According tosthiramati, atman and dharmas are simply conceptual constructs (parikalpita, trbh[l15.20-21] aima dharmas ca upacaryana ity aimadharmopacarah), whereas the vin.anaparinama exists as a real entity. it is patent that he takes the locative ending invinanapariname as signifying a locus. if the vinanaparinama serves as locus insuch a conceptual construction, it is properly to be said to be the cause of the con-ceptual construction.Thus we may say that there obtains a causal relation between viinanaparinamaand upacara as a conceptual construction.4. The following points have become clear:(1) The term upacara in atmadharmopacara is to be understood as signifying corceptual construction or a conceptual construct, leading to conventional discourse.rather than a metaphorical expression.(2)the locative ending of the word vijnanapariname signifies the locus (adhara) inwhich occur the conceptual constructionupacara) of atman and that of dharmas.This shows that the vijnanaparinama is the cause for the occurrence of the concep-tual constructions.unebe cannot be justified in saying that various verbal expressions (upacara) referto the transformation of consciousness. According to the Yogacara doctrine, the vi-nanaparinama exists as a real entity and hence cannot be referred to by any verbalexpression. Rather, what can be the referent of a verbal expression is simply atmanor dharmas, which are just conceptual constructs.Thus the verse (padas a-c) is to be translated as follows:"lndeed, the different kinds of conceptual constructionupacara) of atman and dharmaswhich occur in everyday life (loka) and in theoretical discourse (sastra), occur in the transformation of consciousness."references) Trbhul trimsikabhasya (sthiramati). See Trk[u]. trk[uj trimsikakarikavasubandhu). Sylvain Levi ed., viinaptimatratasiddhi: deux traites de vasubandhu vim
〓ia  lingaine accompagnee dime eyplicaio en prose et trimsiki a temaineavec le commemaire de siamati , paris: librarie ancienne honore champion press1925.unebe, Toshiya[2004 "The "grammarianis obection" in sthiramatis rrimsisbhiasya and bhartharis argument on the secondary application of words." in theetoumains and seven Rivers: prof musashi tnchikawais felicinion olame. delhi Mctilal banarsidass.key words) timsikakarika, upacara, vinanaparinama(Graduate student, hiroshima university.新刊紹介
四津谷孝道
「ツォンカパの中観思想
A5版・389頁・定価9,975円大蔵出版・2006年11月
