Gopadatta' Jatakamalaon the first complete edition of its 16extant legendsMichael HHN
1.the gopadatta hypothesisIt is now almost30years ago that I raised the gopadatta hypothesis, ie. the at-tribution of at first l4, later 15buddhist legends, transmitted anonymously in theBuddhist Sanskrit literature of Nepall) and written in the campu style, to gopadattaauthor of a saptakumarikavadana which is available as a separate text both inSanskrit and tibetan. i also contended that these 15legends were taken fromGopadatta's Jjatakamala whose existence is known from Somendra's postscript tothe bodhisattvavadanakalpalata composed by his father ksemendra. A fragmentarymanuscript of gopadatta's jatakamala was purchased by Giuseppe TuCCIin Nepalaround193(cf. his note in the winternitz Felicitation volume) but seems to be lost forgood. For the details cf. my booklet haribhatta and Gopadatta, tokyo 1977and1992.
I would like to emphasize once more that the Gopadatta hypothesis is proved be.yond doubt only for the svajataka (no.10in the list below) from which Sarvanandaquotes half a stanza in his Tikasarvasva, marking it with the words iti gopadattahHowever, by the "argument of vicinity", ie., the fact that the legends in question(orm groups of 3,5,or10(11) legends in the secondary or tertiary sources (seebelow), and by self-quotations (in the case of the *ajiatasatrvavadana and the punyaraisya-vadana) all the remaining legends are de facto included in that hypothesis except the〓aitrakanyakovadana and this has been subjected to a separate study by konradKLaUS who regards Gopadatta's authorship as very likely.2. the l6legends attributed to gopadatta- the current state of researchThe 15legends which I attribute to gopadatta can be found in four secondarysources and one tertiary source:
1)jatakamalavadanasutra (jAs):1l legends2) avadanasarasamuccyAss) 2legends (plus 3 already contained in jMAs)3)bodhisattvajatakavadanamala JM)1 legend4)A fragmentary palm leaf manuscript from tibet microfilmed and published byRahula SAMkrIYayaNA5)asokavadanamala Ass): l legend, plus 2 already known from bjAM ancJMAS
For the details of these sources cf. again hAhN1992.A primary source in thestrict sense of the word would be a complete or fragmentary manuscript ofGopadatta's Jatakamala like the one mentioned by TucCi. In our context, a second-ary source is an extract of one or several legends in more or less unaltered form.placed in a new environment, while a tertiary source is the extract from a second-ary source, again placed in another environment, however this time with substantialchanges. The last case includes additions to, and deletions of, the original source.transformation of the prose portions into verse and other deliberate changes of theoriginal wording. This is what generally happened when older sources were embedd-ed in the so-called "buddhist puranas" or avadanamalas. For a structural analysis ofthese works I refer to the recent paper by kiyoshi Okano entitled "subhasitama-haratnavadanamala ni tsuite"2)and to my analysis of the Mahaiiatakamala. Theseare the 15legends which I attribute to the author of the saptakumarikavadana,; theyare given here in the order of their sources:No. titlelocationParallels/Tertiary sources3)SuprabhasajMAS0.3MJM7
〓.rsipancaka jMAS35ASS1 (identical)〓.SarthavahajMAS36ASS2(identical), SAM41.sarvamdadajMAS37ASS3 (identical), MJM45.jnanavatijMAS386.kapisvaraJMAS397.meghajMAS408.Matrposahastin jMAS41bkAM339.nagajMAS42
10.SvanjMAS43MJM8
11.Matsarananda aSS4aRM25,SMRAM20/24.dA(T204)2.bhavalubdhaka ASS5aAM1213.Maitrakanyaka3.Maitrakanyaka bJAMlla8,jMAS54(identical)14.*Ajatasatru5)palm leafms. from tibet, cf. jbRxxiv(937),pp.149-58.15.punyarasi
5.Punyarasi2aAM13Additional abbreviations:6)ARMavadanaratnamala (unpublished)BkAMbhadrakalpavadanamala (unpublished)〓at〓ivyavadana (tokyo university library, ms. No.170)jBOrsjournal of the bihar and orissa Research SocietySAMsmbhadravadanamala (unpublished)SMRAMsubhasitamaharatnavadanamaloBetween 1980and 1996all but three of the 16〓gopadatta' legends (theSaptakumarikavadana included) were edited (or re-edited; Nos.13 and 14),one of them(No.5)in a so far unpublished M.A. thesis. Six of these editions are accompanied byEnglish translations (Nos.2-4,1l,12,15),four by German translations(5,7,9,13).7)The three legends not yet published according to their secondary sources are nos.1(suprabhasa),8atposahastin), and 10(Svan). nos. l and 10are already knowrfrom their tertiary source, the mahaiiotakamala. However, there is a great differ-ence in their respective adaptations. while the svajataka is preserved quite faithful-ly in the Mahaiiotakamala with all its stanzas the Suprabhasajataka was handledextremely freely. In the Mahaiiatakamala version we find less than half the stanza:of the jatakamalavadanasutra and even that version seems to be mutilated in thebeginning and end. Thus the published text of the mahajiatakamala gives only arather imperfect picture of the original story. the matposahastijiataka contains thelongest and most difficult prose passages of all the 16legends and also the greatestnumber of textual corruptions. This is the main reason why it has so far not beerpublished.
3. the current research projectThe current research proiect entails an edition of all the l6extant legends in one
volume, accompanied by an English translation. Apart from the practical aspect othaving the extant parts of the work in one volume, there are two maijor reasons forwinding up the research on this work at this time. The first reason is that it seemsto be fairly sure that the only primary source, the manuscript mentioned by TuccIabout75years ago (uncertain, see below, footnote8),is now lost for good. our col-leagues in Rome have made great effort to secure and describe what is still avail-able of Tuccr's collections. while some works have unexpectedly turned up, likeSarvaraksita's Manicudaiataka, if only in microfilm, others, like dharmatrata's a-bhidharmasamuccayakarika or Gopadatta's jatakamald, were not found. Thus thepreviously nourished hope that access to tuccr's fragmentary manuscript mightverify (or even falsify) the Gopadatta hypothesis, provide us with intelligible readingsfor the many corrupt passages in the secondary and tertiary source and even give usanumber of new, so far unknown legends has evaporated.8) The second reason isthat over the years a greater familiarity with Gopadatta's style and train of thoughthas been achieved, which makes it possible to improve upon the text and translatiorof several of the legends. of great help is the fact that in a digitized text the searcfor possible parallels to difficult words and expressions becomes incredibly fasterand also much more reliable.The starting point of the planned edition and translation of the l6extant legendsis the manuscript of the jatakamalavadanasutra which is dated 169Ad and conains ll of the l6extant 'gopadatta' stories. its owner, the Ryukoku university inKyoto, has already published an excellent facsimile edition of the whole manuscript9and is supporting the current editorial project through a Numata Fellowship. it willbe supplemented by two stories from the avadanasarasamuccaya, one from theAsokavadanamala, one from the palm leaf manuscript from tibet, and by theSaptakumarikavadana with its three independent sources (Sanskrit, Tibetan, commen-tary) plus the secondary source of the asokavadanamala.only recently i tried to determine the percentage of Gopadatta's work that is stillextant in the sources described above. The result is quite surprising. From the colo-phon of Tuccr's manuscript we know that the size of the whole work was3,300granthas or3,000syllables. in order to determine the size of the ex-tant parts we have to count the syllables, ie., the vowels of the computerized texts
which is, in fact, a simple task. All one has to do is to replace the vowels, startinwith the diphthongs ai and au by an arbitrary place-holder, e.g. nothing, and make anote of the number of replacements of each vowel. Their total is the number of syl-lables which in Indian texts are defined as open syllables, ie., syllables ending in avowel, no matter whether this is etymologically or morphologically justified or not.inour case the number of lost or inadvertently omitted aksaras had to be includedwhich are indicated in my files by the respective metrical symbols of a long, shortor metrically undetermined syllable. The result of the calculation which includesalso the titles of the stories as given in the secondary sources is98,636aksaras oi3,127granthas. There is a certain degree of uncertainty because some of the storiesmay be either incomplete or, on the contrary, contain additions of the compiler, as iscertainly the case with the punyarasi and Suprabhasa stories. but the variancsshould most likely be within the limit of 50granthas so that the exact number ofrranthas of the 16 stories lies between3,077and3,177. Since the average length ofthe stories is 3,127/16～195granthas that means that only one or two stories woulcbe missing. The missing story (or at least one of them) could be thdrdhadhyasayavadana that according to tuccr's communication was the last storof the work. In fact, the number of stanzas in the l6extant 'gopadatta' storie:(1,288)is only slightly less than thatin ryasura's jatakamal3),and the size ofAryasura's whole work is also3,300granthas. The consequence is that my formeassumption that the number of stories in Gopadatta's jatakamala was34,like thoseof the jatakamalas of his two predecessors aryasura and haribhatta, cannot be correct. My assumption was based on the tacit presupposition that the work followsthese two models both in its internal and external structure.This presupposition, however, is obviously wrong, because the similarities thaone notices during a first perusal of the stories are only superficial. already inhhn1977Icame to the conclusion that the external structure of Gopadatta's workdeviates from that of his predecessors. we do not find the regular structure of theintroductory and concluding section that we are used to from aryasura andharibhatta and also the use of metres is at variance, as I have shown in a separatepaper10) one gains the impression that on the stylistic level gopadatta is both aneclecticist and syncretist; he freely uses and combines the literary devices which he
finds in the works of his predecessors and deliberately abandons their somewharigid structure.In the next section we will see that also the internal organisation of Gopadatta'swork is different, and therefore there is no need to assume that only in the numbelof legends he should strictly follow the model of aryasura and Haribhatta. ThatHaribhatta sticks to the number of aryasura can easily be explained as a token ofhis admiration since he expressly mentions aryasura as the great and unsurpassablemaster of the genre in the introduction to his own work.1l) For Gopadatta who hadmore than one predecessor in the field there was no need to do this.Iwill not conceal that there is one weak point in my reasoning. it is again basecmn a certain presupposition, namely that all the 16 legends whichi attribute tcGopadatta are from his jatakamala and not from any other work. The sceptic mightargue that the title of the work is jitakamala, not avadanamala, and hence onewould expect it to consist only of real jatakas, i.e. stories about the bodhisattva. Aswe shall see in the next section, there are six stories among the l6which do not ful-fil this criterion. My counter-argument is the group-wise occurrence of the legends.above all the ll legends in the jatakamalavadanasutra. since chapters l-34are thecomplete jatakamala of aryasura, and chapters44-53are taken from Haribhatta'sJatakamala it would only be naturally if chapters35-43that bear such a great sty-listic resemblance to each other were also taken from one and the same work.12)Anda second counter-argument is the above-mentioned drdhadhyaisayavadana whosetitle proves that Gopadatta did not make a sharp distinction between jatakas andqvadans.
4. Structure and content of gopadatta's jatakamalaunfortunately we know nothing about the internal organisation of Gopadatta'swork. In the cases of the jatakamalas of aryasura and haribhatta it is obvious thaltheir legends are meant to illustrate the six moral perfections. In aryasura's workthe first three decades seem to be devoted to giving or da-10),morality or sil(11-20), and forbearance or ksanti (21-30).The situation is somewhat unclear with re-gard to the last four legends. In Haribhatta's work we find the following distribu-tion: giving or dana is illustrated in legends l-1l, morality or sila in legends 12-17,
forbearance or ksanti in legends 18-21, striving or virya in legends22-25,meditation or dhyana in legend26,and wisdomor prajna in legends27-34.particularlyinHaribhatta's jatakamala the moral perfections are most clearly mentioned or alludecto in the mottos and epilogues. The situation is different with regard to gopadatta'swork. In one case, the prabhasa legend, I have a vague suspicion that it might havebeen the opening story, as in the works of Haribhatta and ksemendra, since it de-scribes the future buddha's first bodhicitta, thus marking the very beginning of hisbodhisattva career. This is what the stories (here arranged alphabetically) themselvesdisclose:
1.aiatasatru (As)missing?
〓.bhavalubdhaka (hlThe dangers of the longing for existence (bhava)3.jnanavati (jv)〓iryadana, viryakaruna, dan4.kapisvara (ki)dana, kypadana, sila〓Maitrakanyaka (MkMaitrakanyaka (Mk)〓(〓(2〓()
Matrposahastin (Mph)i〓l(2〓(2〓()
Matsarananda (Mn)donadonadan
8.Megha (Me)
The illusory character of nature9.naga (Na)
lsantiksantiksanti10. punyarasi (pr)The unreal nature of things11.rsipancaka (rp)The dangers of birth (i) [siin HMXv!12.saptakumarika (Sk)(vairagya)
13.sarthavaha (sv)〓onadanadona
14. sarvamdada (sd)donadanadon
15. Suprabhasa (Sp.(bodhicitta
16.Svan (v)
(parahia)
The attributions given above are only tentative. A more detailed analysis mightyield slightly different results. And it should be emphasized that sometimes the con-nection between the content of a legend and the moral perfection it is meant to il-lustrate seems to be quite arbitrary. This, however, would be the topic of anotherpaper. one can see that six of the legends cannot be pressed into the pattern of the
〓ix moral perfections: l ajatasatru,2, bhavalubdhaka,8. Megha, 10.punyarasi.1l.rsipancaka, and l2. Saptakumarika. They are neither fatakas nor avadanas in thsconventional sense of these terms, but they relate some historical or quasi-historicalincidents or consist of philosophical discussions. in this respect they resemble partsof kumaralata's kalpanamanditik rstantapankti (alias Asvaghosa's Sitralamkara)on the one hand and ksemendra's bodhisattvavadanakalpalata on the other hand.This is perhaps Gopadatta's most important innovation to the campu form as de-reloped by his two predecessors aryasura and haribhatta. in a kind of (over) simpli-fication one could claim that aryasura expanded well-known stories - the contentof which he did not change substantiallyby the embellishments of kavya, includ-ing long niti and subhasita portions. haribhatta then took the liberty of reworkingthe plots so as to create a logically structured story, organized very much accordingto the indian drama with which he was obviously quite familiar. Gopadatta finallyfrequently focusses on ethical and philosophical topics which he elaborates prefera-bly in the form of dialogues. This is mostly done in verse, which may account forhe substantial reduction of the prose portions in his stories as compared to theworks of his predecessors.1)with the exception of the Ajatasatru story; see below.)In: Minami ajia kotengaku, l,2006,pp.1-19)metrical adaptations, if not stated otherwise4)the metrical adaptation of the matsaranandovadana can be found in various manu.scripts of the Avadanaratnamala or Ratnavadanamala cycle, in one of the divyavadana manuscripts and in a separate manuscript. For the details of all these manuscriptsand their mutual relationship cf. Ratna haNduukaNdE, Five buddhist legends in theCampu style, bonn1983,pp.1-(11)5)The title of legend No.14is reconstructed. it is not given in the legend itself.6)For the details see hahN192and Okano 2006.7)all the bibliographical details can be found inaHN1992,except for the followingtwo papers that were published after 1992) Michael HaHN, "der duldsame Nagakoig.Gopadattas Nagajataka", berliner indologische suudien81995),pp.87-135;2)Mi-chael haHN, "die einladung der pratyekabuddhas. Gopadattas Meghajataka", berlinerIndologische Studien996),pp.157-2018)according to giuseppe tuccl, "animadversiones Indicae.8.sankarasvamin,sivasvamin and Gopadatta", in: festschrift fir moriz winterniz, leipzig1933,pp
243-6,the colophon states that the manuscript "was copied by the bengali upasakasriuktidasa in the year 1810,10h month, 19ph day from parinirvana." This is not suf-ficient to determine the date exactly, however, according to what we know about thedating of buddha's parinirvana in bengal at that time (for which the year543Bc is aikely candidate) the date given in the colophon could correspond to friday,20January1268Ad. iowe this precious information to dr karl-heinz Gzio, bonn. this datewould make it a rather old and presumably precious manuscript.while reading tucci's paper again, I noticed that due to a possible misunderstandingof a crucial passage I might have looked for the manuscript at a wrong place all thetime. tuccl writes: "A fragmentary collection of Avadanas in the kavya style was foundin Nepal by me while examining the manuscripts recently purchased." (p.246)Ihad al-ways understood this sentence as "purchased [by me, ie. tuccll" however, it is equallypossible, or even more likely, that tuccl actually meant. "[by the (then) Bir libraryl!Such a manuscript, however, is mentioned neither in buddhisagara parajuli's catalogueof the bir library nor in the title list of the nGMpp. in this connection it might beworthwhile to relate a story thatl once heard about tuccl from someone who knew himwell. it says that tucci had purchased some precious manuscripts in nepal. This leakedout to the Nepalese authorities who approached him in his hotel and demanded that heshould return the manuscripts. allegedly Tuccl became furious and replied that he wasnow the rightful owner of the manuscripts and would rather burn than return them. wa:this perhaps the fate of the sole manuscript of Gopadatta's Jatakamala?9)In Sanskrii Mamuscripis of the buddhist stras from nepal, ed. by taijun iNOkucHIKyoto 1990(Facsimile series of Rare texts in the library of the Ryukoku university9.),pp.69-25010)"zur verteilung der versmabe in der buddhistischen campu-dichtung", zeitschrif〓er deutschen Morgenlidischen gesellschaft, supplememt v, 〓x. deuischer orientali-stentag vom4.bis29.z98 berlin, Ausgewahlle vortrage, herausgegeben vonFritz Steppat, wiesbaden 1982(1983),pp.245-252.11)acaryasuraracitani ma jatakani karta ksamah samatayapy amugamtum anyahsiamsur eva kumudapratibodhasakias taraganah samudito py asamarthaeva"Noother author is able to imitate in a similar (high) standard the jatakas composed by theteacher (acarya) sura. only the 'cool-rayed' (moon) is able to open the night-lotuses.while even the whole group of stars is unable to achieve this ."12)the separate placements of suprabhasa at the beginning (chapter0.3)and Maitrakan-taka at the end (chapter54) are determined by other factors (content and incorporationof the complete bodhisattvajatakavadanamala).(Key words> gopadotta, Jatakamala, complete edition(professor, university of Marburg)
