Characteristics of the Studies of Tamil Saiva SiddhantaTAMURa  koya
1introduction The study of Saiva Siddhanta has traditionally taken two routes.The first is that of the Sanskrit Saiva Siddhanta, which developed in Sanskrit textswritten by the Saiva theorists such as Sadyojyotis, Ramakantha and Aghorasiva.The second is that of the Tamil Saiva Siddhanta (abbreviated as Ts hereafter), whichdeveloped in Tamil texts as represented by cittanta cattiram, a series of texts dat-ing from the l2th to l4th centuries. The latter also includes the studies ofTirumurai, which date from the 7th to l2th centuries.2)As the two routes have different historical backgrounds, scholars have tended tcconsider Sanskrit Saiva Siddhanta and TS to be separate schools of thought.3)Tokunaga, however, observed that "because tamil saiva siddhanta has a theory ofdivine grace that supplements the religious rites, it is probable that these two schoolsof Saiva Siddhanta have a mutually supporting relationship."4) Therefore, one of thegoals of recent studies of Saiva Siddhanta is to elucidate the relationship betweenSanskrit saiva Siddhanta and Ts.5)〓aProblematic assumption in the studies of ts although a number of stud-ies of Ts have been undertaken since the l9th century, they are not particularlyhelpful for the comparative study because they tend to regard Ts as a single fixedsystem. This assumption that the texts of TS form a single fixed system is not ex-pressly stated, but it is observed by the fact that the studies are all synthetic andquite hesitant to compare various different theories in the development of the sys-tem of Ts. The words of piet strongly imply its existence: "Meykanta-deva, theauthor of the Siva-inana-bodha, summarizes the entire philosophy within thecompass of forty lines of tamil poetry. he wants to show that, logically, theSiddhanta is all of one piece, woven from the finest fabric of the human mind."6)
〓
Early ts, represented by cittanta cattiram, spans 100years, and we cannot denyits theoretical developments. The understanding on "the letter om" is a good exam-ple. The tiruvarupayan written by umapati7), whom the present author is nowstudying, contains a chapter on "five letters". The following two stanzas are the beginning of this chapter:The books which have [Sivas] grace, the hranyaka8) and other [texts] are all concerningthe nature of the five things9), if one understands and goes into them.God, sakti, pasa, strong maya and life (atman.exist in "the letter om"(Tiruvarutpayan 81,8210))"The letter om" onkaram) is typically analysed as comprising five elements, namelya", "u", "ma", "vitu (Skt. bindu)" and "hatam (Skt. nada)". it can therefore be saidthat the five things beginning with God correspond to these five elements. Intheory, however, the five things correspond to "five letters" consisting of "ci", "v"、"ya", "na" and "ma". The stanzas quoted above are in fact followed by detailed ex-planations of the "five letters", and "the letter om" is not referred to again inTiruvaruppayan. we can therefore conclude that "the letter om" and the "five let-ters" became unified in iruvaruipayan.This unification is not found, however, in the texts of Meykantar and his discipleArunanti.ll) The five elements of "the letter om" are assigned to akankaram Sktahamkara), putti (Skt. buddhi), manam (Skt. manas), citam (Skt. cita) and ullam, andto five atiteyvam(skt. adhideva), respectively. This explanation of "the letter om'takes a position distinct from that of the "five letters".Conversely, Manavacakankatantar, another disciple of Meykantar, mentions onlythe name of "the letter om" without reference to its five elements and atiteyvam.2Approximately 0years later, umapati wrote civappirakacam, which does not men-tion "the letter om" at all.lt is probable that the concept of "the letter om" underwent changes early in thehistory of TS. The assumption held by the scholars, however, prevented them frompaying attention to such theoretical developments of TS. when we read the textsmore carefully, they in fact set forth a number of different theories, and the theoristssometimes even dispute with each other. we can therefore conclude that the assumption is incorrect.
〓characteristics of the studies of ts A review of the history of the study ofTS clarifies how this assumption has been formed. There are three types in the aim:of studies of Ts, and the studies can be classified accordingly. although the typeswere quite different from each other, all of them resulted in the same assumption〓.1studies comparing ts with christianity the study of TS began with theneed for Christian missionaries to understand the religion and philosophy of SouthIndia for the sake of their mission. As a result, understanding the outline of TS as〓theoretical system was more important than elucidating the history of its develop.ment and examining the different perspectives of the theorists. Therefore, earlystudies of Ts tended to synthesise various theories. The studies of hoisington, Popeand Schomerus are considered to be this type.13)Schomerus' studies, which arebased on his vast philological reading, completed the first and most elaborate de-scription of the whole system of TS theories, and became the most important sourceof information for the later studies.〓.2studies under the influence of the tamil Renaissance The first Indiarscholar to study TS in modern way was Nallaswami pillai.14)He aimed to developan academic standard by which tamil teachers themselves, rather than europeans.could teach Tamil and Indian subjects15)and regain their just pride by removing thestereotype of "the noble aryans" against the "savage tamilians")Nallaswami pillai began publishing a journal, siddhanta deepika,17)in Englishand tamil, and encouraged Tamil scholars to study tamil and Indian subjects.18These studies, undertaken by tamilian scholars who sympathized with his views,were mainly engaged in comparing Ts with western thoughts or applying Ts to theontemporary society.19)For the basis of their studies and as a symbol of their pride,the scholars needed the fixed system of Ts and paid no attention to its develop-ment.20)
〓.3Philoloqical studies philological studies began to be undertaken in the mid-〓0th century. The studies of paranjoti, Matthews, piet, devasenapathi andDhavamony belong to this type.21)This type of study cannot be satisfactorily defined as philological, however, be-cause these scholars were very eager to deeply expound one text or one concept, butquite reluctant to elucidate the differences among the texts.22)As a result, they per-〓

petuated the view of TS as a fixed system.4lssues inthe study of ts and conclusion The above analyses of the historof the study of TS show that the studies have tended to regard Ts as a single fixedsystem. in other words, the scholars always focused their interest on the static as.pect of Ts and have been quite hesitant to consider the dynamics of theoretical de-velopment of TS in the texts. it is therefore necessary to re-examine the texts of Tsfor more exact understanding, compare them with each other and reveal their rolesin the development of Ts. only after this re-consideration of Ts will the compara-tive study of Sanskrit Saiva siddanta and TS be possible and meaningful.)cittanta cattiram consists of the following 14 texts which date from the l2th to l4thenturies: tiruvuntiyar, tirukkalirruppatiyar, civananapotam, civananacittiyar, irupa-virupatu, Unmaivilakkam, civappirakacam, tiruvarutpayan, vinavenpa, porrippakrotai,kotikkavi, Nencuvitutitu, Unmainerivilakkam, cankarpanirakaranam.2)For outlines of the history of TS in japanese, see Muneo tokunaga, "Minami-indo ncShukyo Shiso", iniwanami koz toyo Shiso, vol.ndo Shiso 2),Iwanami Shoten1988,pp.163-191, jun takashima, "Early history of saiva Mathas-8th-13thcentu-ries", in journal of the Japanese association or south A studies, No.1, The japa-nese Association for South asan studies, tokyo,1989,pp.41-59;do., "siva Shinkono kakuritsu - saiva Siddhanta to Minami Indo", indravida no sekai - ido nyumonIl, tokyo daigaku Shuppankai, tokyo,1994,pp.41-53;sengaku Mayeda, "siva-kyoShoha no Seiritsu to tenkai -Saiva Siddhanta wo chushin ni shite", in indo chusei Shiso kenkyi, Shuniusha, tokyo,1991,pp.265-287. See also Muneo tokunaga"civananacittiyar, parapakkam4-01", inindological Reviewndogakuho), No.3,Indogakuho-sha, kyoto, 1981,pp.1-18in english), do., "Saiva Siddhanta Ha no saktiShiso", in journal of indian ad buddhist studies ndogaku bukkyogaku kenkyu), vol〓xvl, No.2, Japanese Association of Indian and buddhist Studies, Tokyo,19893)For example, in Japan, the following statements were made: "Sanskrit saiva Siddhantsis distinguished from Tamil saiva siddhanta of advaita theory, by using only Sanskritand its visistadvaita theory" (tetsuzan ihara, Indo-kyo, 3rd edition, daito shuppansha.1981,p.259; first published in43,"Southern Saivism tends to be treated as a singleschool of saiva Siddhanta, but it seems to be right to think that this Saiva Siddhantais divided into tamill saiva Siddhanta discussed in this article and Sanskrit Saiva Sid.dhanta represented by Aghorasiva." (Muneo tokunaga, "Minami-indo no Shukyo Shiso",footnote 8,p.190)
Characteristics of the studies of Tamil saiva Siddhanta (k. TAMuRA)(494)Muneo Tokunaga, op. cit., pp.190-191.5)this article does not comment on Sanskrit saiva Siddhanta. The latest studies of Sanskrit Saiva siddhanta are: dominic goodall ed. and tr., bhatt Ramakantha's commenlryon the kiranatantra, volume l, Institut Francais de Pondichery, Pondichery, 1998do., The parakhyatantraScripture of the saiva siddhania, Institut Francais de pondichery & ecole francaise d'Extreme-orient, Pondichery,200.6)john h. piet, alogical presentation of the saiva siddhanat philosophy, The christian literature society for india, Madras, 1952,p.6.7)when comparing ts with Sanskrit saiva Siddhanta, the most notable theorist otTs is umapati, who lived in the l3th and l4th centuries. He is said to be the au-thor of civappirakacam, tiruvarutpayan, vinavenpa, porrippakrotai, kotikkavi,Nencuvitututu, unmainerivilakkam, cankarpanirakaranam, tiruttontarpuranacaram,Cekkilarnayanarpuranam, tirumuraikkantapuranam, koyirpuranam, Arunmuraittirattu.〓ivattalacivanamacattinamakkalivempa, pauskarabhasya, sataratnasangraha (the textsunderlined are in Sanskrit, others in tamil). attributions to him of some of the textsabove, such as Unmainerivilakkam, are doubted.8)"The books which have siva's grace" are the texts of saivism, and "the iranyaka" heremeans the four veda.9)These are in this context the five things given in the next verse.10)arul nulum aranamum allatum aintin, porul nul teriyap pukin.(81) irai catti pacam elimayai avi, ura nirkum onkarattu ul.(82)11)Meykantar, a theorist of the 13th century, is regarded as the first systematiser of Tstheories by his writing of civananapotam. arunanti wrote an elaborate commentary olCivananapotam, civananacittiyar, in the l3th century.(2)"The onkaram touches the good auspicious "v" and "ci", does not separate fromthem and is the prevailing light." (unmaivilakkam34)13)H. r. hoisington's translations of civananapotam, civappirakacam and tattuvakaf-talai in journal of the American oriental Society, vol. iv,1853;G. u. pope, The tiru-vacagam or 'Sacred Uiterances' of the tamil poet, Saint and sage Mamikka-vacagarAsan Educational services, New delhi,1995(lst ed., oxford, 1900 h. w. Schomerusder caiva-siddhanta: eine Mystik indiens / nach den iamulischenquellen bearbeitetund dargestell, j. c. Hinrichs'sche buchhandlung, leipzig, 1912.14)J. M. Nallaswami pillai published various studies, such as English translations (Sivag.nana botham of meykand dea, 〓nd ed., dharmapuram,1945;siva-nana-siddhiar ofArunandi Sivacharya, Meykandan press, Madras, 1913, siva-nana-siddhiar supakkamof Arulnandhi sivam, dharmapuram, 1948). his various studies were edited in studiesin saiva siddhanta, The south india saiva Siddhanta works publishing Society, Ma-dras, 1984(lst ed., 1911)15)see j. M. Nallaswami pillai, "our aims", in siddhanta deepika, vol. l, no.l,1897,
p.14.
16)See do., "ourselves", in siddhanta deepika, vol.7,No.l,1907,p.29.17)the ligh of truth or siddhanta deepika, a monty journal devoted to Religion, ph,〓osophy, literature and science, vols. l-14,1897-1914(reprinted by Asan educationaservices, Madras,2001).18)"our journal will devote itself to bring out translation of rare works in Sanscrit ancTamil, both literary and philosophical and religious, will devote its pages to a morecritical and historical study of Indian religious systems, to develop a taste for and tinduce a proper and more appreciative cultivation of our indian classical and vernacular languages and literature, to bring into the tamil all that is best and noblest in theiterature and philosophy of the west, to supply to it its deficiency in the field of scienceand history, ancient and modern." (nallaswami pillai, "our aims", pp.14-15.)19)translations of the tamil and Sanskrit texts into English are not a few, but they are,in the same way as explained in the next section, far from satisfactory.20)Nallaswami Pillai's movement has continued, and many universities and institutionare engaged in the studies of TS. There are a number of studies in the journals such asSiddhanta deepika and Saiva siddhanta, jlournal devoted to the exposition of siddhantaPhilosophy, Religion, literature and Comparative Understanding, vols.l-26, saiva sid-dhanta Maha Samaiam, Madras, 1966-1993.21)violet paranioti, saiva siddhania, Second ad Revised edition, Luzac & co., London1954,gordon Matthews, Siva-nana-bodhamanual of siva Religious doctrine,Oxford university press, oxford, 1948;JohnH. piet, alogical presentatio of the sai-wa siddhanta philosophy; v. A. Devasenapathi, saiva siddhant expounded in theSivainana-siddhiyar and its ix commentaries, university of Madras, Madras, 1960;M. dhavamony, Love of God-According to saiva siddhanta, oxford university Press.London, 1971
22)There are also some difficult problems in tamil texts as explained by Takanobu taka-hashi in "before grammar. issues on reading Some classical Tamil texts", inelectricJjournal of the institute of indology and Tamil studies, vol.9&10, University of co-logne, koln,2003(http://www.fas.nus.edu.sg/journal/kolam/vLuMES/ kolam9 &1/takahashi.htm) do., "bunpo zekoten text kaishaku no Shomondai-", in studiesiindiphilosophy ad buddhism, vol.13, department of lndian philosophy and bud-thist studies of the university of Tokyo, Tokyo,2006<Key words> tamil, saivism, saiva Siddhanta, umapati(Graduate student, University of Tokyo)
