Nagesa on anga in asiddham bahirangam antaranigeMASEShinobu
0. The paribhasa or metarule asiddham bahirangam antarange, which is formulatedby Paniniyas, provides that the application of a bahiranga operation has not been es-tablished when an antaranga operation is to apply and hence that an antaranga oper-ation applies in preference to a bahiranga operation. in his paribhasendusekharaNagesa explains what is to be understood by the term anga as follows:"what is understood by the term anga in the given paribhasa is just a cause (nimitta.[of an operation] which consists in an item's own form that is referred to by the iterterminating in a locative ending and so on sptamyadyanta)"The question arises whether a genitive ending is included in 'a locative ending andon'.2) commentators on the text hold the opinion that a genitive ending is ruledout. but, in my opinion, the genitive ending should not be excluded from 'a locativeending and so on', since it is evident from Nagesais interpretation of the paribhasekaryam anubhavan hi karyi nimitataya nasriyate that he considers a constituent ele-ment referred to by a genitive form to be the cause of an operation.1.according to nagesa, what is called antaranga is a grammatical operation olrule that applies earlier in dependence upon the constituent element which arisesearlier, while what is called bahiranga is one that applies later in dependence uponthe constituent element which arises later.3)he says, moreover, that what is re-ferred to by the term anga is a cause of an operation, which is well exemplified bythe following derivation ofpatvya (patvi lpclever woman', instr. sg.)1)〓(3)〓〓.1.77(2)〓〓6.1.77 patyyaAt stage (1), two operations have the possibility of application. one is the ya sub-stitution for uin patu, provided for by p..177,the other is also the yax substitutionfor nis, provided for by the same rule. Since the constituents of patvya are intro-
duced in the order(1)2)〓, the y substitution for u whoseanga is i (is) is antaranga with respect to the yay substitution fori whose anga is dTa). consequently the yan substitution for u takes precedence over that for i.The constituents i and a in this derivation are those which are referred to by thelocative form aciin.177.what is more, they serve as the causes of the yv sub-stitution which applies at stage (2) and that which applies at stage(3).for theythemselves create the possibility of the application of the y substitution. Thus itmay be said that the term anga refers to the constituent of a derivative which is thecause of an operation in the sense that its introduction makes the application of aroperation possible.4)2.let us now discuss whether, as argued by the commentators, a genitive form isnot included in 'a locative ending and so on'.2.1.In the first place, vaidyanatha, by saying that by 'and so on' adi) are meant arablative ending and others,5) tries to avoid including a genitive ending. in the sec.ond place, bhairava categorically refuses to include a genitive ending in 'a locativeending and so on'. According to him, a genitive form in a rule refers to what under-goes an operation and not to a cause for an operation.)2.2.Nagesa's explanation of karyam anubhavan hi karya nimittaya nasriyate inpiS, however, clearly shows that the referent of a genitive form in a rule can be thecause of the operation stated in the rule.7)let us see how nagesa explains it. hediscusses the derivation of adhyeto (hixi 'learn', rd sg. periph. fut. A).(1)ahi〓.3.3.15(5)ai3.84(2)ai3.4.78(6)〓hi.1(3)a.3.1.33(7)〓hy.1.7'(4)〓i.2.4.85adhyetaIn stage(5), the guna substitution for the verb root i provided for by p.73.84ap-plies. The verb root i is listed in the dhtupatha with the marker n. p1.1is theprohibition rule which disallows the guna substitution when its cause is markedwith k, G, n. Consequently, the undesirable consequence follows that the guna sub-stitution is prohibited by this rule. but if the karyam anubhauan hi karya nimittayanasriyate is taken into consideration, the prohibition rule does not apply. The rea-son is as follows. p.7.3.84has the genitive form angasya which recurs fromp..4.
26)nagesa on anga inasiddham bahirangam antarange (S. MASE3.In order to prove this point, let us consider the derivation of gaudhera ('posterityByp..1.3guna is substituted for ik of an item termed anga. in the present in-stance, by p...13 the verb root i is called anga with respect to the affix tas. Thisverb root is what is referred to by the genitive form angasya and what undergoesthe operation of guna substitution, so that it cannot be treated as its cause.It is clear from the above that Nagesa considers that the verb rooti with the mark-er n, which is referred to by the genitive form angasya, serves as the cause of theguna substitution and at the same time has the possibility that it undergoes this op-eration. To explain Nagesa's idea, if a constituent makes the application of an oper-ation possible, it is the cause for the operation, such a constituent, which is preciselywhat is meant by the term anga in the antarangaparibhasa, can be referred to by agenitive form in a rule.of Godha ).
(1)godharak4.1.129(4)gaudheyra ..197(2)gaudharak〓7.2.118(5)gaura .1.663)gaudhayra.71.2gaudheraIn this derivation, the ey substitution for dhindhrak at stage(3),provided for by〓.71.2,is antaranga with respect to the y-lopa for y in eyra at stage(5),provided forby p..6. the constituents of gaudhera are introduced in the order (1)goh→(2)dhrak. dh in hrak is referred to by the genitive form phadhakhachagham inp.7.1.2.while the constituents r in eyra are referred to by the locative form vali in6.1.66.comparing these constituents, we see that roccurs later than dh (ey). Thisshows that the ey substitution can be said to be antaranga with respect to the y-lopa,even if the constituent h is referred to by the genitive form. if the constituent dh,which is referred to by the genitive form, were not the cause for deciding the statusof antaranga/bahiranga, it would follow that we cannot discuss the status of antar-anga/bahiranga of p.7.1.2with respect to p.6.1.66. From the fact that Nagesa statesthat the ey substitution is antaranga with respect to the y-lopa, thus, it should beconsidered that the constituent referred to by a genitive form can serve as the causeor anga for deciding the status of antaranga/bahiranga.8)4. As shown above, the term aiga in the antaranga paribhasa refers to a constituentelement whose introduction makes the application of an operation possible. Such a
constituent element can be referred to by any case form in a rule and is properly tcbe regarded as a cause of an operation. it is reasonable to suppose that when hesays 'a locative ending and so on' in explaining what the term anga means, Nagesaintends to imply that a genitive ending is included there.<References) pi: paribhasendusekhara edited by Abhyankar (poona: b. o. r.i962).Gad: commentary on the pis. vaidyanarhakrtagadarikasamvaliahParibhasendusekharah (poona: Anandasrama, 1913bhairavi: commentary onpis.paribhasendusekharah bhairavamisrakrtatikaya samalankrtah (benaresCaukhambha,1905).Mase. S.206."being antaragnga as established by the indi-cator uH". tetsugaku (the journal of hiroshima phiosophical Society)58.1)pis(80.12-81.2) inasabdam asrityetyadibhasyena ca paribhasayam angasabdenasaptamyadyantopattam sabdaripam nimittam ev grhyata iti spastam evokiam2)〓1.1.4sthi sthaneyoga .16tasminn iti nirdiste purvasya 〓)Mase [2006:111-1234)Ianini's grammar, the order in which constituent elements of a derivative are introduced is of two kinds: in one case they are introduced in the order of pronunciationand in the other case they are introduced in the order in whichpanini assumes them toccur. as shown here, the constituents of patvya are introduce in the former order. Aninstance in which constituents are introduced in the latter order is adhyayan ('learn-ing').in the derivation of this item, its constituents are introduced in the order ()→(2)lahi. The affixuis the anga of guna substitution and adhi isthat of dirgha substitution. The former is referred to by the locative form sarvadhatu-kardhadhatukayoh in4and the latter by the ablative form akahin.015)gad(88.16-17)ddina pancamyadiparigrahah.167tsmad ii uttarasy6)bhairavi (121.8-9) saptamyadyanteti / atradina sasthyantasabdopattatiriktasya graha-nam, na tu ssthyantasabdopattasya, karyino mimittatvena anasrayanat /7)pis14.1-2)mmy adhyeta sayitetyadav insinor nittvad gunamisedhah syad at ahakaryam anubhavan hi karyi nimittataya nasriyate "/8)pis(78.2-3 eyadesader aparamimittakatvenantarangatvac c<Key words> paribhasendusekhara, anga, antaranga, paribhasaGraduate Student, hiroshima university)
