The ideal of the bodhisattva king in Sri lanka and theReform of the SanghaYabuuCHI Satoko〓lntroduction> The legitimacy of the kingship in Sri lanka, where buddhisnwas introduced by the conversion of a king, was acknowledged by the role of theking as a promoter and a protector of buddhism. As the qualities of an idealBuddhist king were gradually spread through the society, the concept of a king asbodhisattva came to be applied to political ideology, and the king's authority was somuch strengthened that kings in the island not only purified the buddhist sanghabut also carried out ecclesiastical responsibilities. This article, based on historicamaterials in the Pali chronicles and epigraphic sources, gives a historical overvievof this process from the Anuradhapura to the Polonnaruva period.2.<The anuradhapura Period>ccording to the Pali chronicles, buddhisnwas officially introduced into sri lanka in the 3rd century BC by a son of theIndian Emperor Asoka, Mahinda, who converted king devanampiyatissa (250-210B.C.) to buddhism. buddhism thereafter became the national faith of the island. Th4Buddhist community had its headquarters at Mahavihara, and it developed andspread all through the island under the control of the single school of MahaviharaHowever, the first secession, that of the Abhayagiri vihara, from the Mahaviharaschool occurred in the reign of Vattagamani Abhaya (89-77b.C.))Then a factiorwhich left the Abhayagiri school in the reign of Gothabhaya(253-266A.d.) alsoformed an independent school at Jetavana, which was built by king Mahasena (276-303A.D)These three schools, i.e., Mahavihara, Abhayagiri, and Jetavana, existedindependently of one another until king parakkamabahu I(13-1186A.d.) unitedthem into one in the Polonnaruva period.Buddhist kings were called bodhisattva only after a new sect of buddhismknown as vetulyavada appeared in Sri lanka during the reign of voharikatissa (214-23a.d.)The title of mahasatta, compassionate to all beings, was given to king
Reform of the sangha (S. yabchi)The ldeal of the bodhisattva king in sri lanka and theSirisanghabodhi(251-253A.d)4)He was considered to be a paragon of virtue and:zealous patron of the faith who led a life of piety and practiced the ten royal virtuesHe, in fact, became the ideal model of a king in sri Lanka that endured for genera-tions after him. According to the Pali chronicles, kings thereafter were sometimesreferred to by his name, i.e., sirisanbhabodhi, in the chronicles and epigraphs, thuscrediting them with the same virtues. buddhadasa(340-368A.d.) is said to have ledthe life of a bodhisata.5) upatissa I(368-410A.d.) was credited with having prac-ticed the ten paramitas.6) Aggabodhi i(75-608A.D.) aspired to the attainment of thehighest enlightenment,7) and Sena i(833-853A.D.)to buddhahood.8)In the early Anuradhapura period, some kings who extended special favors tcthe Abhayagiri school were involved in some kind of the bodhisattva cult. howevelin the middle of the Anuradhapura period, the bodhisattva cult was well recognizedas an ideological factor of kingship, implying that a king should have a moral re-sponsibility for the country and inducing him to lead the exemplary life of a bodhi-sattva, regardless of which monastic schools he favored.after the late Anuradhapura period, the legitimacy of the kingship came to befounded on the claim of a king being a blood relative of the buddha. No evidence ofa king actually claiming to be a descendant of the sakya clan is found before thetenth century, when the claim occurred for the first time in an inscription in th4reign of kassapa v(914-923A.d.),9)who was one of the most prominent scholars ofhis time. This claim also occurs in a stereotyped manner in the epigraphic record:of his successors, dappula Iv(924-935a.d),0)Mahinda iv(956-972A.d.,1)andMahinda v(982-1029A.D.) This trend can be traced back to the eighth century.when originally ecclesiastical terms like vat-himi, which were used in reference onlyto the sangha in earlier times, came to be applied to kings as well. in addition, anattempt to elevate the position of the king to a stature equal to the highest ranks ofthe buddhist order, namely, that of the buddha, bodhisattva, or arhat, is evident irthe use of the termpirinivan in reference to the demise of kings, namely, a term as-sociated with the buddha and arhats.The description of a king as a bodhisattva and the claim that he was actuallykin to the buddha indicate that the king, by the tenth century, came to be virtuallyrecognized as the head of the buddhist church, on both symbolical and political lev-
The ldeal of the bodhisattva king in Sri lanka and thereform of the sangha (S. ya)els. They enhanced the authority of a king over the sangha so he could, and did, in-ervene to settle disputes, set up regulations for the administration of monasteries.and initiate purifications through disciplinary measures. Such interventions were effected by several kings, some of which in the late Anuradhapura period were in.scribed in epigraphic records as vihara katikavata, collections of rules for the re.cluses in the temples. The vihara katikavata served as a role model for the Sasanakatikavata, promulgated after the polonnaruva period, which was rigidly enforcedon every recluse in Sri lanka.3.<The Polonnaruva Period〓after the polonnaruva period, some kings wersometimes described as being a Cakkavattin, although this term never used about aking during the whole period of the Anuradhapura kingdom. JayabahuI(110-111A.d.),gajabahu ii(1132-1153A.d.),parakkamabahu I(1153-1186A.d),nissankamalla(1187-1196A.d.), and Lokissara (1210-1211a.d.) are entitled cakkavattin in somchronicles and inscriptions. The northern parts of Sri Lanka fell into the power ofthe South Indian kingdom colas in 17and remained a subiect state until1070when vijayabahu I(1055-1110A.d.) defeated the Colas and became the king of SriLanka. He resided at Polonnaruva, which he made the capital of his kingdom. Thefact that the title cakkavattin referring to him and to other warrior kings is used irthe chronicles in the context of describing their frequent conflicts with rival claimants suggests that the title does not necessarily mean "a rule by non-violence," a:the Pali canon would suggest. In addition, given that the expressio cakravartti/kal)as a royal title appears in the tamil inscriptions of South India earlier than in theSinhalese in Sri lanka in the polonnaruva period, and that the title otCakravartti(ka) had come into vogue in the cola kingdom earlier than in SrLanka, the use of the term cakkavattin for kings in the Polonnaruva period in SriLanka was probably a borrowing from the cola practice.Another departure from tradition in terms of Sinhalese royalty in this periodwas apparent in respect to personal names. kings in the Anuradhapura period most-ly had the names closely associated with the buddhist tradition, such asBuddhadasa, upatissa, Agghabodhi, Sanghatissa, Moggallana, Mahinda, andKassapa, whereas in the polonnaruva period, none of the kings had a name of spe-cial buddhist significance. viiayabahu, Jayabahu, vikkamabahu, virabahu.
The ldeal of the bodhisattva king in sri lanka and thereform of the Sangha (S. yabuuchl)gajabahu, Parakkamabahu, and nissankamalla are all names which are associatecwith heroic qualities.However, the concept of the bodhisattva king still remained a living traditionat this time, as is shown in the names of some kings in the Polonnaruva period whoare described as sirisanghabhodhi, meaning an ideal king, such as viiayabahu 3)Parakkamabahul,4)Nissankamalla,15)Sahasamalla(1200-1202A.d,6)and Lokissara.17)Vijayabhahu ii (1186-1187A.D.) was literally called bodhisatta.18)Parakkamabahul was termed cakkavattin9as well as Sirisanghabodhi and re-garded as being endowed with both heroic and bodhisattva characteristics. hegained absolute control of all regions and all social groups in the island, which hadbeen in complete chaos after the demise of vijayabahu i. conscious of his supremeauthority over the island, parakkamabahu i decided to reunite the sangha under theleadership of the Mahavihara school, a feat that no other king before him had evelbeen able to achieve. in addition, he issued the first Sasana katikavata for all recluses. The greatest political contribution of this unification of the sangha was tinstitute the title of Mahasami for the supreme hierarch of the sangha, throughwhom the king could control clerical affairs and exert his authority over theBuddhist order.〓onclun As has been described, the bodhisattva cult as an ideology forkingship developed from the early anuradhapura period. regarding a king as a bo-dhisattva led to the identification of the king with the highest ranks of the buddhistorder and increased the legitimacy of his authority to rule over and unite it, asParakkamabahu i did, in the Polonnaruva period.<Texts and Abbreviations> cv. culavamsa, PTS. hv. mahavamsa, PTs. Vps. yamsatihappakasini, pTS. /Ez. epigraphia Zeylanica. (Footnotes)l)Mhv.33.78-98.〓Vps. i. pp.175-176Mhv.37.33.3)Mhy.36.41.4)〓hy.36.90.5)cv.37109.6)cv.37.180.7)cv.42.1.8)cv.50.65.9)ez.i,p.30.10)ez.,p.222.11)Ez.. p.227.12)ez.Iv,p.64.13)cv.5910.14)ez.i, p.193.15)ez.,pp.171-72.16)ez.ii,p.224.17)ez.Iv,p.87.18)cv.88.35;90.48.19)cv.72.329(Key words>kingship, bodhisatta, cakkavattin(Part-time lecturer, Toyo university, D. litt.
