A Study of tantric Rituals in Nepalese buddhismSamadhi of Tara in SaptavidhanuttarapujaBAJRARYa Manik1. IntroductionMost of the major rituals in Newar buddhism consist of a stage whereVajracarya priest contemplates the nature of a certain deity as a part of the mailrites. The rite is called samadhi danegu' and it consists mainly of contemplating hisown tutelary deity, which in most cases is the Samvara. The samadhi of Samvara.called tri-samadhi, is so common among newar buddhists today that it is wor-shipped in most of the rituals performed by vajracaryas, regardless of the deity inquestion. This is true also in the case of saptavidhanuttarapuia (hereafter sP),whichis one of the most popular and fully developed exoteric Newar buddhist rituals. Theritual of SP employs the Sevenfold Supreme worshipl) and the deity to be wor-shipped in it are in most cases tara, Lokesvara, or Sakyamuni buddhaExceptionally, in the sp that I observed on August28,2004in a private house atLalitpur city, a samadhi of Tara was performed instead. Depending on the ritualperformed and the manuscript of the ritual manual used on that day, i will describethe samadhi below. The manuscript, which is a private collection of Dharmaraiavajracarya, has43 folios with14 lines per folio. it is dated as Nepal Era 1061(194ad) and compiled by Siddhiraja Gubhaju of bubaha, patan.2.The samadhi of TaraThe samadhi rite is the beginning of the main rites. it is performed after the pre.liminary rites like suryargha (reception of the Sun), gurupadargha (reception of thevajrasattva and the priest), the purification, and the gurumandala. The tarasamadhiof Sp can be described in the following stages.〔〓 salutations: in the beginning, salutations are made to the triple gems. Then the bud-
A Study of tantric Rituals in Nepalese buddhism (M. bjRcHaRYa)dhas and bodhisattvas are requested to be present in every direction.〓contemplation of Mahattaritara: a syllable tam is visualized at the middle of a mooidisk in ones own heart. buddha and bodhisattvas are arisen from the ray of light streamecfrom the syllable. Then the text describes that one should first perform exterior and interior worships (bahyadhyatmyapujia) and then the sevenfold supreme worships. Then 〓uyta is conceived followed by the pronunciations that all the phenomena and the self arepure in nature. Then from the Tm syllable, a white upala flower is generated in whichanother syllable Tam is present. From that syllable, Mahattaritara is generated who is fullyornamented and seated cross-legged (paryanka) over a great-moon-disk (mahacandrasana)n a lotus. She is green in color and has no companions. She is granting boon (varada)with her right hand and holding a stalk of blue lotus (indivara) in the left. Then conceivingthe posture of samayamudra, one visualizes oneself as Mahattaritara. pushpendra kumaldiscusses, by referring to several labelled images, that Mahattaritara was also known asMahattarayi, and Mahat-tara.2) he also gives iconographic variations of this form of Taraas being flanked by two female companions and other one as being seated in lalitasana[三l contemplation of varadatara: The second samadhi is that of Varadatara. after contemplating sunyata as in the former samadhi, one visualizes in oneself a all-sided lotu:(visvakamala) born from the syllable Pam. A green colored syllable Tam is then visualizecon a moon-disk which is born from the syllable a in the middle of the lotus. Then fronthe syllable tam, the green colored varadatara is generated.She is distinguishable by her four female companions. She is holding a water-lily (nilo-pala) in the left hand, granting wishes (varada) in the right and seated in the ardhapary.anka posture. She is flanked by asokakanta and Mahamayuri in the right side and byEkajata and aryajamguli in the left side. Asokakanta is yellow in color, and holding abranch of Asoka tree and a vajra with her left and right hands. Mahamayuri, yellowish incolor, holds a peacock-tail-feather (mayurapicchika) and a yaktail-fan camara) in her lefland right hands. Ekajata is dwarfish, dark colored, and holding a tiger skinvyaghrajina).She has three eyes and terrible tusks. She has blazing hair and is also holding a chopper(kartr) and a skull-cup (kapdla). similarly, aryajamguli, green in color, is holding a blacksnake (krsnoraga) and a fan camara) with her left and right hands. Then one visualizesthese deities as oneself.[〓v adhisthana: after that, one performs the empowering (adhisthana) of the moon, thesun, one's hands, conch-shell, flowers, the bali, the ritual ground, and one's body, speechand mind, etc.
)a study of Tantric rituals in nepalese buddhism (M.bajRAcHaRYA)[v] nyasa: this is followed by nyasa, a process where mantras of various deities are implemented into different parts of the worshipper's body. A total of26 mantras are imple-mented using both right and left hands.[〓l /karsana: at this point, one meditates that aryatara who is in the akanistha heaveris invoked into the mandala. The mantra om tare tuttare ture Svaha is muttered 108times to her.【〓] worshipping: in the next stage, aryatara is worshipped with five transcendentaBuddhas. it is followed by the worshipping of 40Taras.[〓l concluding rite: at the conclusion of the samadhi, one recites praises to the transcendental buddhas, aryatara, Mahattaritara, and prasannatara followed by the worship-ping of the crown (makuta).3. conchusion-the samadhi of Mahattaritara described in the text is almost similar to the sadha-na no.90of the sadhanamal.) The text misses the parts where vikacotpalamudrais performed and the mantra otare Tuttare ture svaha is muttered. on the othelhand, in sadhanamala, we do not find the line where Mahattaritara is identifiedwith the self.-In the second samddhi, the text does not mention the name of the central deity.But the sadhana no.9l of Sadhanamald4)is identical to the samadhi. As in the for-mer samadhi, the text misses the mantra om Tare tuttare ture svaha. consideringthe similarity, we may assume that the samadhis of both the Taras were extracted tothis SP text from the sadhanamald.-the process of nyasa in this samadhi is different than that of the trisamadhi. inthe trisamadhi5),24seed syllables are implemented in parts of the body (catur-vimsaty-anga-nyasa) using the middle finger of the right hand. in the case of pres-ent samadhi,26mantras are implemented using both right and left hands.The text
1 taraya samadhi dane. jaki svam svapotane.om namah sritriratnabuddhaya. samanvaharantu mam buddhah asesadiksu sams.thitah.3.

A study of Tantric Rituals in nepalese buddhism(M. bAjcRYa)(119〓hanam jaki jvane. om namah sriaryatarayai.prathamam svahrdaye indumadhyasthatambijavinirgatarasmibhirnispannan glrubuddhabodhisattvan dhyayat. tamsca bahyadhyatmya pujabhih sampujya tadag-re saptavidhanuttarapujam kuryyat. om sunyatam vibhavya om svabhavasuddhahsarvadharmah svabhavasuddho'ham iti uccarayet. tat candre tamsambhuta-sitotpalasthatamkarodbhutam taram syamam dvibhujam ekamukham daksine varadamvame sanalalinjdivari sarvabharanabhusitam mahacandrasane paryyankanisan-nam cintayet. lsamayajmudram bandhayet. mahattaritaratmanam bhavayet.3 om purvavat sunyataparyantam vibhavya pamkarajavisvabjadalamadhye akarena-candre syamatamkarajam taram syamavarnam sarvalamkaradharam. vame nilot-palavatim daksine varadam ardhaparyankanisaanm. daksinaparsve asokakantanrnanaratnamakutam vamadaksinahastayorasokapallavakulisadharam. tatha maha-mayurim vametarakarayoh mayurapicchikacamaradharinim. vamaparsve ekajatankharvam krsnam vyaghrajinadharam trinetram damstrakaralavadanam jvalatpin-galordhvakesam kartrkapaladharinim. tatha aryajamgulim syamam vamadaksinahastayoh krsnoragacamaradharinim svabhavayet.4mandale tane. thana bhavana yaye. om akarena candramandalam. javam. onakarena suryamandalam. khavam. om vairapadmahastau hum. sankha thiye. omsankhadhisthana hum. pujiabhah thiye. om puspadhisthana hum. bali. om tist-havajre hum. mandale. om vajrabhume hum. sire thiye. om ah hum.5thana nyasa yaye. laha jvalapa. om ah hum aryatarayai hum. javagu laha puyeke.om akarena candramandalam. khavagu puyeke. om akarena suryamandalam. ja-vagu angu raniya. om krum am jim kham hum. khavagu raniya. om lam marpam tam krum. javagu laha cakamka kyane. om ah hum svasvaha. khavagucakamka kyane. om vajrayaksa hum. sire thiye. om aryatara hrim. kathusa thiyeom jayayai hum. nuglay thiye. om vjayayai hum. tyapusa thiye. om jayavjayaihum. pali thiye. om hum svavaladayai hum. pamcanga laha nipam cakamke. omhum ha abhayapradayai hum.khavam yayegu. sire thiye. om maitrye hum. kapale. om ksitigarbhe hum. mhutu-sa. om tare hum. nugale. om manjughose hum. tyapusa. om sarvanivarnavis-kambhi hum.
javagubaha thiye. om ajitaya hum. khavagubaha thiye. om aparajitaya hum.
khvaile thiye. om marasainyapramardanaya hum. nugale thiye. om hum kalamrtyu-prasamanaya hum. javgu puli thiye. om hum dhanadayai hum. khavagu puli thi-ye. om vasudharayai hum. jodhu thiye. om amitabhaya hum svaha. laha nipamkyane. om aryatarankusa jah hum vam hoh svaha.6 thana jaki jvana laha jvalape. om hrdisthitapamkarajarasmim mudraya samharyaakanisthabhuvanasthittm sriaryataram mandale akarsanena bhavayet.japayaye. dhah8.om tare tuttare ture svaha.7svabhavasuddha padyadi taye. srimatsrisriaryataramandale padyacamanarghanpraticcha svaha. om aryatarayai vajradhatumandale svaha. om dharmadhatavenamah svaha. aryavairocanaya svaha. om aksobhyaya svaha. om ratnasambhavayasvaha.
om amitabhaya svaha. om amoghasiddhaye svaha. aryatarayai svaha. puspatarayaisvaha. dhupatarayai svaha. dipatarayai svaha. gandhatarayai svaha. rasatarayaiSvaha.
prasannatarayai svaha. suklatarayai svaha. dhanadatarayai svaha. locanatarayalsvaha. mamakitarayai svaha. pandaratarayai svaha. tarayai svaha. bhrkutitarayaisvaha. saptalocanitarayai svaha. svetatarayai svaha. nilatarayai svaha. pitatarayaSvaha. raktatarayai svaha. syamatarayai svaha. siddhilocanitarayai svaha. vairata-rayai svaha. ekajatitarayai svaha. yogatarayai svaha. bhuvanatarayai svaha. can-dratarayai svaha. suryatarayai svaha. mangalatarayai svaha. hasyatarayai svaha.lasvatarayai svaha. rasarangatarayai svaha. mahamangalatarayai svaha. suman-galatarayai svaha. sampurnaghatatarayai svaha. dviparajatarayai svaha. basantata-rayai svaha.
om vajrapuspam praticcha svaha.8puja. lasya. stuti. om namo sriaryatarayai namah.om aksobhyam ca mahabodhim sriratnasambhavaya namo namah/amitabham ca maharagam amoghasiddhaye namamy ahamaryataramahadevimahattaritarayai namo namahprasannataradevim sri ta tu tare namastu te 〓/om namaste taradevinam tare ture vire tuttare bhayanasanam/ture sarvakaram svahakaram namamy ahamdharmatarayai svaha. punyatarayai svaha. sriaryatarayai svaha. vajratarayai svaha.〓

A study of Tantric rituals in Nepalese buddhism (M. bajhaRYa)(121om sarvavyapibhavagryagryam sugatadhipatijinam/traidhatukam namaskaromi sarvabhayanasanamnaivedya. mata. yedharmd.thana makutapuja yaye. iti sriaryatara samadhi samaptam.Bibliography
Bhattacharyya, benoytosh (e.). sadhanamala vol.1. baroda: oriental institute.1968Kumar, prof. pushpendra. tara: the supreme Goddess. India: bharatiya vidya prakashan.1992
vairacarya, badriratna. aryyatara pujavidhi. kathmandu: hira Ratna vajracarya.1996lairacarya, herakaji. trisamadhividhi pustakam. Lalitpur: Manadevi vajracarya.1995vairacarya, pandita asakaiji, harsaratna dhakhva and Santaharsa vajracarya. 'Saptavidhanapuja In palesvam vol. 2. lalitpur: lotus Research centre. pp. 1-9.1990vajracarya, Sarvajnaratna. Saptavidhanuttara pujavidhi. kathmandu: nepala bauddhasamskrti samraksana kendra.2003Manuscript:
〓 taradharmaya Saphu Thva, in the private collection of Dharmaraja vajracharya, pa-tan, number of folios:43,NS 1061.Notes:
1)the sevenfold supreme worship in the bhadracaryapranidhana has been described as(〓)vandana, (〓)pujana, (i) desana (iv) modna, (v)adhyesana, (vi) acana, and (vi)ndmqnq,
2)prof. pushpendra kumar(1992:p.583)benoytosh bhattacharya (968) pp.176-1774)Ibid., p.1775)see herakaji (1995):pp.20-21(Key words> tara, samadhi, saptavidhanuttarapuja, Newar buddhist RitualGraduate student, Aichi gakuin university.
