The Role Played by Goddesses in theHaracaritacintomaniShibzAKI Maho1IntroductionThe haracaritacintamani (hcc) by Jayadratha is a collection of religious storieswritten in kashmir in the late l2th and early 13th centuries AdAs its title (hara-cariia) and the repeated use of the phrase (Siva-caria))in the preface (hcl-1.5,1113,48)suggest, it is made up of myths and folklore regarding the deeds of siva. awork steeped in saivist belief, the hcc contains many explanations of the historyand spiritual meaning of holy places, divinities, rituals, holy days and other ele-ments of religious life.The hcc contains32stories, but the endings of two (HCc29 and Hcc32)aremissing. of the30complete stories,26are either about siva or feature him inaimportant role. howeverin four almost consecutive stories in the second half of theHCc goddesses-siva's wives-play a central role, while Siva himself is hardlymentioned. The four stories are as follows: hcc22:The birth of Durga; hC23:Kausiki's defeat of the demons Sumbha, Nisumbha and Mahisa, hCc25:The self-sacrifice of the vidyadara prince jimutavahana to save a serpent's life, HCC26:The faithful servant Viravara.This article describes the special characteristics of these goddess stories, consid-ers their place in the HCc as a whole, and offers a speculative answer to the question of why they are included. it focuses in particular on one story, HCc26Viravara. by comparing its plot to versions of the story predating the HCcIestab-lish some characteristics of the hcC. based on this comparison and also on previ-ous research (Shibazaki,1997and1998),I identify common characteristics of the fourgoddess stories and consider the background to their inclusion in the hCc. I alsocompare the content of the four goddess stories with the siva-centric stories as a ba-
(8)The Role played by Goddesses in the haracaritacintamani (M. ShizAkl)sis for considering how and why Jayadratha structured the hCC as he did.〓the viravara story: outline, versions and analysis〓.1outline ofthe storyHCC26tells the story of a faithful servant, Viravara, who sacrifices his son togoddess in order to prolong his king's life. the crisis is finally resolved by the god-dess. The elements of the story are as follows:A A brahman called viravara comes to a king (called vikuramatunga in some ver.sions and sudraka in others) asks to enter his service, and is accepted.Bviravara then demands a high salary from the king. The king agrees, but has hisspies check on viravara's conduct. Their reports convince the king of viravara'strustworthiness.Cone night, the king hears someone weeping, and orders viravara to find out thereason for the sorrow. The king secretly follows Viravara.Dfinding a woman lamenting in the middle of a lake, Viravara asks the reason forher sorrow. The woman, who is a goddess, tells him that the king's life will endthree days from now. She also tells him that the only way to save the king is forviravara to sacrifice his own son to the goddess Candika (Sarvamangala in Hit.3.8). viravara goes home immediately.E viravara explains the situation to his family, and sets out with his family to thetemple of candika.F cutting off his son Sattvavara's head, viravara offers it to Candika.G Seeing her brother's death, Viravara's daughter dies of a broken heart. witviravara's permission, his wife kills herself in order to be with her children.Hvariant Hl: his duty fulfilled, Viravara is about to sacrifice himself in order tofollow his family.goddess.
I observing all this, the king is about to cut his own head off in the hope thatCandika will revive viravara and his family.JA voice from the air stops him at the last moment, and all of Viravara's familyare brought back to life. Everyone returns to their homesvariant H2: his duty fulfilled, viravara cuts his own head off as a sacrifice to the
The role played by Goddesses in the haracariiacintamani (M. Shizakl)(9)〓meomen。たれて
KThe next morning, Viravara tells the king that there is nothing to report aboutthe previous night's weeping. Astonished at his servant's dignity, the king tellsthe true story to his ministers and rewards viravara〓.2previous versions of the viravara storySeveral versions of the story exist. one is foundin hitopades (hit.) by narayanawhere it features as an episode in the third chapter "vigraha". The kashmirian ver-sions of brhatkatha, ksemendra's brhatkathamaniari (BkM) and Somadeva'sKathasaritsagara (kSs), which were based on the same source, both contain twoversions. The first one is adopted as an episode in the main story. The second one isthe fourth story of the vetalapancavimsatika (vet.) which was included in BkM andKSS as a sub-story. The viravara story also appears in other versions of the vet.(Kamimura, 1978,pp.294-313) but the vet. versions included in the BkM and kSs arethe ones that have the closest relationship with the compilation of the HCc, so iex-clude the other vet. versions here.The following versions of the viravara story, then, are known to have existed pri-or to the writing of the hcc:l. hit.38(peterson, 1887,pp.ll2-116);2. BkM15.5.190-192(Shivadatta and Parab, 1982,p.525);3.kSS9.3.86-193 (Durgaprasadand Parab, 1915,pp.267-270);4. BKM vet.4.(BkM9.6.263-332)(Shivadatta andparab, 1982,pp.308-314);5.kSS vet.4(kSS12.11.5-123)durgaprasad and Parab1915,pp.414-417)2.3comparing the versions of the viravara storyTable l shows how the plot elements are arranged in the hcc and the five previous versions.Table l. plot structure of the viravara storyplot elements marked with an apostrophe differ slightly from the standard version.The names of the city, the king, and viravara's son differ between versions, as
shownin Table2.Table2: characters and place names in the viravara storyThe six versions differ in the reason given for including the viravara story in theoverall narrative, as shown in Table3.Table 3: reason for including the viravara story in the overall narrativeversn
BkM15.5.kSS9.3,hit.3.8example of faithful servantBKM vet.4, kSS vet4H26example of benevolent kingTaking the three tables together, the versions fall into three pairs. The first pairBkM15.5and kSS9.3,stresses the role of the heroic servant, whose self-sacrifice(Hl) is the climax of the story. This emphasis is reflected in the plot, in which theking does not feature in the climactic scene, and made explicit in the overall narra-tive, which introduces the viravara story as an example of a faithful servant. Thetwo versions also use the same character and place names. Let us call this pair type l.The second pair, bkM vet.4 and kSS vet.4, gives the leading role to the king.making his would-be sacrifice (〓) the climactic scene. They use the same names.and also feature a question-and-answer session at the end of viravara story whichnakes it clear that the king is the most courageous character. let us call this pairType2.
The third pair, comprising hCc26and hit.3.8, does not fall neatly into either ofthe above groups. hCc26has a king-centric plot and gives the importance of theking as the reason for including this story in the overall narrative, but it employs thesame names as the versions that stress the role of the servant. hit.3.8,on the otherhand, has a king-centric plot and uses the same names as the versions that stress therole of the king, but is included in its overall narrative as an example of the faithful
The Role Played by Goddesses in the haracaritacintamami (M. Shizaki)(11servant. There is no known connection between hCc26and hit.3.8, and the sig-nificant differences between them allow us to ignore hit.3.8in this study.These comparisons suggest that the author of HCC26wrote his version while re.ferring to at least two previous versions of the story, one type l and one type 2.Further evidence for this claim comes from the presence inCC26both of versesthat parallel kSS9.3,a type l text, and of verses that parallel kSS12.11,a type2text. here are the relevant verses:HCc26.36cd-38(F)kSS9.3.147-149ab (F37
HCc26.36cd-38(F)lumi  dev mapranar jnav asmab-e mrchopharena mama jiav mahpabhuhur nrpah//36yam vikramatungaya bhupad idam akantilmmpo vkamatungo ta sastl ca ksamam akankam
〓a-uktavato mal shu putrey abhasa/ evam uktayatas tasya saidhu puey udrya saltatah karatalayatya siro viravarah sisoh/〓uiuh i  ui
bruvan /38
HCc26.50cd-51(1)HCC26also contains several changes from all the previous versions, both type land type2. two changes are particularly significant. First, the cause of the king'searly death is explained as his lack of devotion to siva (HCc26.20-24.ab): this under-lines the importance of respect for siva-a point made clear by the final verse of thestory, hcc2665. Second, the king's devotion to the goddess Candika at the climaxof the story is the key to the denouement: this underlines the importance of bhakti,which is mentioned inC26.56,59and elsewhere.Despite these differences and its use of different names, HcC6adopts the sameking-centered perspective on the story as the type2 versions. The king's leadinglksat krtya samiksya-eva krtakrtyo mahipatih〓saitkrya samksa-eva krakrtyo mahipaih/t aloky akhilam tatra channashah surakabat alokya akhilam tatra channasthah sudrakallat alokya akhilam tatra channasthah sudrakah50cd
nrpah.
sascaryah savisadas ca salaijias ca vyacintayatsascaryah savisadas ca salajjas ca vyacintayataryeh savsadas ca salajas ca vaitaytsakula ca saduhkha ca sascaryah c vyacinsakulah ca saduhkhah ca sascaryah ca vyacin-layat//94
ayatl/94
na drstam na srutam yac ca tatkarma krtava〓c aukmakainluo auayam//51
tam/95at

(12)the Role played by goddesses in the haracariacintamami (M. SHibazAk)role is also expressed in the story's title "vikramatunga" -the story does not have itsown title in bkM vet.4 and kSS vet.4-and in the table of contents (-1.41)3 the goddess stories in jayadrathais narrative strategy〓.1the organization of the hccHcc25relates prince jimutavahana's mercy and self-sacrifice, and just as irHCc26,devotion bhakti) to a goddess brings a resolution to the story and is there.by recommended to the reader. these two stories also have in common the appear-ance in the climactic scene of siva's wives Parvati and Candika to save the life ofthe hero. The two preceding goddess stories, HCC22and23,feature well-knownmyths of siva's wives Durga and kausiki. Thus we have two pairs of stories sharingsimilar themes.These pairings lead us to suppose that Jayadratha selected and paired these fou1stories because of these similarities. Is there evidence of a similar selection methodin the Hcc as a whole? The stories related to Siva in the hCC do allow a broadclassification hcc1.2-9: Myths, traditions and lore related to Siva: hcc10-14stories explaining the history of holy places, hc15-21,24: the teachings or mer-ts of belief in Siva, hCc27-29:Myths, traditions and lore related to Siva; hCC30-3l Explanations of saiva doctrine.This grouping suggests a similar selective and organizing purpose on the part ofJayadratha in the siva stories too. This is a promising topic for future research.〓.2sources of the goddess storieswhat literature did Jayadratha refer to when he composed the goddess stories?An analysis ofHCC22and23remains to be done, but Shibazaki (1997)establishedclose links between hCC25and the kSS versions, and Shibazaki(1998)demon-strated that HC27,which is the background story of Gunadhya, the author of thebrhatkatha, was written in reference to the kSS. This article has found similar par-allels betweenCC26and kSS texts as the above two papers. we can therefore ar-gue that three sequential stories, two of the goddess stories HC25and hCc26)and the siva story hC27,were written based on the same source, the kSS.In addition to the kSS, we know that Jayadratha referred to at least one sastra, ashe mentions it in the preface. ic.1.5the words "sastra-drstani caritrani", and
The role played by Goddesses in the haracaritacintamani (M. ShibazAk)(13)then in hc1.1.48the words "caritany. tani sastratah" may indicate one particulasource which is not extant. but it is more likely that they indicate several "sastras",Jayadratha, however, does not name any particular sastras in the preface.Jayadratha was born into a highly respected and educated family; his father was aminister of king rajaraja and his brother was the well-known poet Jayaratha. wehave several references attesting to Jayadratha's scholarly life and devotion toSaivism. Thus he would have had access to, and understanding of, a large numberof texts. Gupta argued on the basis of text comparisons that jayadratha refered tothe Matsya, Padma and sivamaha Puranas while writing the hcC.4) Jayadrathaprobably went through a number of puranas extracting stories that fitted the HCC'sthemes.
4Conchusion
Jayadratha seems to have compiled the hccby collecting stories that fitted histhree main themes of Siva legends, holy places, and Saivist devotion and arrangingthem in thematic groups. The goddess stories discussed in this article form anothertheme, included towards the end of the collection. one of them, the viravara story.combines elements of at least two different previous versions of the story and alsoadds its own Saivist emphasis.In the preface Jayadratha explains that his narrative is much more accessible thanhis previous works (Hc1-1.7-1-1.8),)and people of high (uttamanam), medium(madhyamanam), and low capacity (adhamanam) will all benefit in their differentways from this narrative (c1-1.11-13))He may thus have included the goddessstories in order to make the HCCappeal to a wider audience.References
De, S. k.(1923). studies in the history of Sanskri poetics. vol.l, London.durgaprasad, p. and Parab, k. P. (Eds.) (19)The kathasariisagara of SomadewabhattBombay.
Gode, P. k. (1942)descriptive catalogue of the collections of amuscripis deposited aithe bhandarkar orientl Research institute, Vol. X〓i pt. ii, Kavya, Poona.jupta, k. (1976)The haracaritacintamani- its siva legends as compared with those ofthe puranas, Purana, xvii(1),pp.75-83
14)The role played by goddesses in the haracariiacintamami (M. ShibazAki)〓
Gupta, k.(2002)sanskrit saiva kavyas (romcenury ol7h cenury a, vol.I: haracaritacintamani and bhiksatana, Delhi.Kamimura, k.(1978)shiki 2525les of vetara), Toyo bunko 323,tokyo.Krishnamachariar, M.(1974)history of classical Sanskrii literature, Delhi.peterson, p. (ed.)1887)hitopades by narayana, bombay Sanskrit series33,bombay.hibazaki, M.(1997)A story of jimutavahana in the haracaritacintamani, journal of in-dian nd buddhist studies4(2),pp.42-45(l).Shibazaki, M. (1998) The story of gunadnya in the haracaritacintamani, journal of indian〓d buddhist studies4(2),pp.51-54(L).Shivadatta, M. M. and Parab, k. p. (eds.) (1982: repr.) brhatkathamanjari of ksemendra,Kavyamala69,New delhi.sivadatta, M. p. and k. p. parab (eds.) (1983: repr.) The haracaritacintamani of rajaanakcJayaratha, kavyamala 61, bombay.Notes
1)nine manuscripts of the HcC are known or thought to exist. The following list wa:sent by Alex watson to the indology mailing list,24Aug2003(quoted here with theauthor's permission):l. No.7042: library of the india office, london, 2. No.776Bhandarkar oriental research institute, poona (Gode, 1942,p.467),3. No.757:bib.liotheque Nationale de france, oriental department, Paris. watson refers to this MS as"paris d28",4. no.985 catalogue of Sanskrit MSS in the library of his highness theMaharaja of ulwar' by peter peterson, bombay 1892,5. no.206 raghunatha templeLibrary of the Maharaia of jammu and kashmir, 6. Four MSS mentioned in the cata-logue of the university of kashmirin srinagar.2)dese srivijayesasya nivasan preranat tayoh/ caritrani trinetrasya sastradrstaani gumphayel/ Hc1-1.5ucitya tasya caritany adhuna tani sastratah/ mayaikatra nivesyantebhaktidardhyaya dhimatam Hcl-1.483)saktir ekasya yasyasti vicitra paremesvari/ yaya vikramatungasya hanta kim kim nasadhitam// Hc1-1.414)gupta (1976and2002,pp.LXxviii-lXxx)5)vyutpattimatranihsankavivardhitavivekinam/itaresu madiyelu prabandhesv adhikarita//〓CC1-1.7iyam sadharana vani sambhusaktimatah prati/ samastalokasubhaga saithi-lvenaiva sobhatel// Hcl-1.86)tatra-uttamanam bhagavac caritakarnanad bhavet/ svarupalabho nihsesasamsaraun-mulanaksamah// Hc1-1.1lmadhyamanam sive bhaktir drdhatvam avalambate/ ut-padyate kramat sa-eva kathyamana subhavaha// Hcl-1.12adhamanam adharmebhyoivrttau dharmasevanam/ upadeya trayanam apy esa tasmad vibhoh kathal/ Hc-113〓
<key words> haracaritacintamani, jayadratha, viravara story, self-sacrifice(Research Associate, University of Tokyo)
