n Search of the origins of the Five-Gotra SystemSAkUMAhidenori0. The differentiation of the innate capacities of sentient beings into five types, referred to hereafter as the "five-gotra system" (wuxing gebie五姓各別),is said to be adefining characteristic of the chinese consciousness-only (weishi唯識)schoolSome scholars would also seek to apply this five-gotra system to the IndiarYogacara school. but is it really valid to do so? In order to consider this question.let us begin by examining in what form the idea of a five-gotra system existed inthe thought of the indian yogacara schoolit is to be surmised that the controversy about the five-gotra systeminchina hacits origins in the yogacarabhumi (yuqie lun〓伽論)and buddhabhumi-sastra(Fodiing hun佛地經論),translated by Xuanzang玄奘inA.D.648 and649respectively. prior to Xuanzang's translations, consciousness-only thought had been ac-cepted in China and modified in a way suited to the Chinese on the basis olTathagatagarbha thought, and it was considered to be an orthodox form of buddhistthought. having some misgivings about the content of this thought, Xuanzang en-deavoured to translate as faithfully as possible into chinese the Yogacara thoughtthat was actually being practised in India. it is to be surmised that for scholar-monks ingrained with the idea that "all sentient beings possess buddha-nature" evelthe notion of Three vehicles would have been difficult to accept.l)1.The five-gotra system, with five separate categories of beings, is not systemati-cally expounded in the yogacarabhumi, and each category is explained separately indifferent parts of the work. Here I shall cite as one example a passage in the sectionon "maturation" (paripaka) in the bodhisattvabhumi, of which the Sanskrit text hasurvived. In response to a question concerning "maturation," it is explained as fol-lows "from the perspective of the person to be maturated" (bobh, p.78,2lff, t.1579,30:496cl2ff):
There are in brief four kinds of people to be maturated. Someone with the lineage of a sra-〓ak should be maturated in the sravaka vehicle, someone with the lineage of a pratyeka-buddha in the pratyekabuddha vehicle, and someone with the lineage of a buddha in theBuddha vehicle. Even he who dwells in no lineage should be maturated by bodhisattvasand buddhas, blessed ones, in order to go to a good destiny. These four kinds of peopleshould be maturated in these four categories. Maturation should be known in this mannelfrom the perspective of the person to be maturatedwhat would a monk believing in the attainment of Buddhahood by all beingsthink on reading a passage such as this? it is here stated that there are people withno lineage (gotra) or predetermined nature, and though it may be possible for themto be reborn in a good destiny, they will stay within the cycle of transmigration andnever attain buddhahood. This would probably have been felt to be unconscionable.Yet the idea that beings are reborn in a good destiny is also found, for example, inthe srimala-sutra.2) but just because they were deemed on account of a current ofIndian thought underpinned by the notion of transmigration to be reborn in a gooddestiny rather than attaining buddhahood, this would not necessarily have meantthat they were ultimately abandoned by buddhism2.The definitive passage for the five-gotra system is found in the buddhabhimisastra translated by Xuanzang (t.1530,26:298a12ff). The passage in question de.scribes all five categories of beings, the first four of which all ultimately attainBuddhahood through the power of the buddha's compassion. The important pointabout the buddhabhumi-sastra is that it adds a fifth category of beings who willnever attain buddhahood even with the help of the buddha's compassion. Past research has shown that whereas wonch'uk圓測and others focused their attention orthe question of how to enable those of indeterminate lineage to attain buddhahood.〈uiji窺基stressed the fact that those of this fifth category were completely beyondsalvation.)
〓n which scriptures was this idea of a category of beings without any possibilityof attaining buddhahood actually propounded? let us consider the case of thePrajnaparamita-sutra.4) what is worth noting here is the fact that it mentions onlythe first four categories, and it would appear, moreover, that those of indeterminateineage, who have not yet entered the first stage of the bodhisattva, may engender
the aspiration for unsurpassed perfect awakening on hearing the teaching of prajna-paramita and will eventually attain buddhahood just like those destined for one ofthe three vehicles. to the best of my knowledge, the addition of a fifth category ofbeings devoid of any possibility of salvation does not appear in the lineage of theThree vehicles, but appears in relation to aparinirvana-dharma, which belongs to adifferent current.That being so, did the reference to beings without any defining lineage exist irthe original text of the buddhabhumi-sastra? Xuanzang's translation combines several commentaries on the buddhabhumi-sutra which he attributed to bandhuprabhaand others. Among these commentaries, the only to have survived (in tibetan transla.tion) is the buddhabhumi-vyakhyana by Silabhadra, under whom Xuanzang studiedat Nalanda. A careful comparison of Xuanzang's Chinese translation with theTibetan translation of silabhadra's commentary would suggest that he usedSilabhadra's commentary as his main source when translating the buddhabhumi-sastra. at the same time, Xuanzang's translation includes many additional passagesnot found in salabhadra's buddhabhumi-vyakhyana, and some of these passages,moreover, contain ideas that were to characterize the doctrines of the chineseFaxiang法相school. Furthermore, the above section on the five-gotra system iscompletely missing in the tibetan translation, and therefore the original Sanskrit, ofSilabhadra's commentary. what does this signify?3.According to an account given in the yuqielun ji瑜伽論記as restored throughcomparison with Saicho's最澄hokke shuku法華秀句,5)Xuanzang made the fol-lowing observations in this regard:(1)The five categories of beings are expounded in the lankavatara-sutra. Thefifth of these (agotra) consists of two types of icchantika, namely, the icchantikawho does not attain buddhahood so as to save all sentient beings and the icchan-tika who, though he has cut off his roots of goodness, can still attain buddhahoodif he encounters a buddha or bodhisattva, generates the aspiration for enlighten-nent, and practises towards this end. This is what was stated in the Sanskrit textseen by Xuanzang.(2)According to scholars of the western regions (probably Nalanda), the fifth cate-gory of agotra (in this case, beings with no potential whatsoever for enlightenment and
therefore unable to attain buddhahood even should they encounter a buddha or bodhisatt-va) was not expounded in the lankovatora-sutra. since bodhisattvas aspiring tonon-abiding mirvana (apratisthita-nirvana) and icchantika who will ultimately at-tain buddhahood, referred to in above, are also mentioned in the dai jing大集經and dzhidu lun大智度論,it was perhaps felt that there was no need to in-clude them as a fifth category.(3)it is stated that the five categories of beings, including those with no possibili-ty of attaining buddhahood, are not explicitly explained in the lankavatara-sutra,but are clearly explained in the 〓ahayanasutralamkara.(4)when Xuanzang was about to return to China, several scholars suggested thatit would be better to expunge the section on the teaching about beings withoutBuddha-nature since it would not be believed in China, but Xuanzang's teacherSilabhadra rebuked them for making such a suggestion.)of course, since the above is not Xuanzang's own account but what had beeltransmitted in later times, it is quite likely to contain Chinese biases. but because itprovides some important leads for exploring the origins of the five-gotra system, inthe following I shall examine each of the above points.Let us begin with silabhadra's reproof of some other scholars' desire to delete thesection on the five-gotra system. his reproof implied, at least in the view of latelChinese, that the notion of the five-gotra system was regarded as an important partof Yogacara thought by silabhadra or by people at Nalanda. were that so, it is thenrather strange to find no reference whatsoever to this notion in the text of thebuddhabhumi-vyakhyana attributed to Silabhadra and preserved in tibetan transla-tion. at the time when Xuanzang was residing at Nalanda silabhadra was more tharone hundred years old, and even assuming that he had written the buddhabhumi-vyakhyana in his youth, it is hardly likely that he would have completed itin a shortspan of time never to subsequently revise it. Even in the case of basic Yogacaratexts such as the Mahayanasutralamkara and ahayanasamgraha it is possible toobserve a process of historical development. In view of the fact that there is no men-tion of the five-gotra system in silabhadra's buddhabhumi-vyakhyana, it woulcseem more natural to suppose that even if ideas such as the five-gotra system werediscussed among scholars at Nalanda, it was not regarded as an idea representative
of the Yogacara school.〓
4.As Indian sources for the five-gotra system, the yuqielun ji cites the lankavatara-sutra and Mahayanasutralamkara. owing to limitations of space, I shall here focuson the question of how agotra is treated in these two works.41. let us begin with the lankavatara-sutra.[Qquestion.] next, Mahamati, what are the five lineages with intuition (abhisamaya)?[answer.] They are the lineage with the intuition of the sravaka vehicle, the lineage wittthe intuition of the pratyekabuddha vehicle, the lineage with the intuition of the Tathagatavehicle, the lineage not determined either way, and the fifth without a lineage. (lAS,p.63.2-5)
of importance here is the addition of a "fifth" (pancamam) category "without alineage" (agotram)The lineages of the three vehicles and the indeterminate lineagebasically belong to Three vehicles thought, and the addition of a fifth "lineage-less'category results in what to all appearances looks like the five-gotra system.The Sanskrit text of the lankavatara-sutra goes on to explain agotra AS,p65,17-67,1),and its explanation coincides in content with point(I) made in theYuqielun ji cited earlier. The first icchantika corresponds to the idea of non-abidingnirvana, while the second reflects the idea of universal buddhahood going back tothe Mahayana nirvana-sutra, according to which even the icchantika can attailBuddhahood. in other words, there is no reference to the agotra with no potentialwhatsoever for attaining buddhahood. The notion of the icchantika belongs in factto a different current of thought from the agotra of the five-gotra system. if theymerely happened to be mentioned in close proximity in the lankavatora-sutra,8.there then is a possibility that the word "fifth," as ingotramc pancamam, wasnot present in the original Sanskrit. Supposing that the lankavatara-sutra followsthe four-gotra system of the Prainaparamita-sutra, srimala-sutra, and so on, andthat it originally had only the lineages of the three vehicles and the indeterminatelineage, this would then mean that the earliest Chinese translator Gunabhadra addedinA.D.443 the number "five" to a passage that in the original had neither "four'nor "five." The fact that he translates the word abhisamaya in the extant Sanskritext as wujian無間and agotra as gebie zhongxing各別種姓suggests that hisSanskrit text may have differed from the extant text. if the first sentence of the
above passage quoted from the lankavatara-sutra had read for instance "punaqparam ahamate 'bhisamayagotrani katamani" without any reference to the number "five," then it would agree with the assertion of scholars at Nalanda that therwas no mention of agotra in the lankavatara-sutra as reported in the yuqielun9This means, in other words, that the lankavatara-sutra cannot serve as an authorityfor a five-gotra system that included the agotra with no potential for buddhahood.〓.2.does this mean, then, that a five-gotra system that included the agotra with nopotential for buddhahood was not propounded in India? In order to consider thispoint, let us next examine the Mahayanasutralamkara.A verse on the distinction between the kinds [of lineages]:The lineage may be determinate or indeterminate, shakeable or unshakeableBy conditions. This distinction betwecn lineages is, in brief, fourfold. (v.6)In brief, lineages are fourfold. They are determinate and indeterminatc, and these arein [that] order unshakeable and shakeable by conditions. (SA .6[:21,14-18:L:11.20-24]〕)
As is evident from this passage, while the lineages are divided into four, there arein effect only two. Asvabhava and sthiramati would subsequently equate these fou1lineages with the three vehicles and an indeterminate lineage, but no such interpre.tation can be found in the original. Assuming that the use of verse was necessaryfor the purposes of memorization and recollection in the practice of yoga, then thepractitioner actually reciting this verse would have experienced in the course of hispractice a sense of gradually progressing froma state of vacillation to one in whichunder the guidance of his teacher he was no longer vacillating in his resolve. Thissixth verse is merely one of ten verses showing how one should bear in mind andput into practice the notion of "lineage," and the reason that there are four lineagesis that in the first verse it is stated that for each of the eight aspects to be treatecfour kinds will be presented (AI[:20,2-3;L:10,8-9]).In my view, this haclargely practical connotations.Asvabhava clearly defines "someone who possesses a determinate lineage" as"someone who determinately abides in the lineage of the sravaka, pratyekabuddhaor buddha," and Sthiramati too, following this line of thinking, expands on it ingreat detail. In both cases they have reinterpreted the "four kinds" as the lineages of
the three vehicles and a fourth indeterminate lineage, which is readily understand-able in theoretical terms. but an examination of other sections in the〓ahoyanasutralamkara expounding one vehicle thought (including vasubandhu'scommentary) shows that there were as yet no signs of this fourfold classification10)and it does not seem likely to me that people had this in mind at the time.Meanwhile, the agotra with no potential for buddhahood is taken up in verse l1of the same chapter of the Mahayanasutralamkara, and rather than being linked toverse6,agotra is posited in contrast to the gotra dealt with in the first ten verses.This makes it all the more difficult to suppose that there was any notion of a five-gotra system that included a category without any potential for buddhahood.Bearing this in mind, let us now consider the verse ogotra.A verse on the distinction of him who dwells in no lineage:one person is only intent on evil conduct, another has destroyed all good qualities:one person has no goodness conducive to liberation, [another] has little good, andanother lacks the cause.in this [verse] "he who does not have the quality for parinirvana" is meant by "he whcdwells in no lineage." he is, in brief, of two kinds: he who does not have the quality folparinirvana during that time and [he who does not have the quality for parinirvanal inperpetuity. Those who do not have the quality for parinirvana during that time are of fourkinds: he who is only intent on evil conduct, he who has severed the roots of goodness, hewho does not have roots of goodness conducive to liberation, and he who has only inferiorroots of goodness and whose stock [of merit] is incomplete. on the other hand, he whodoes not have the quality for parinirvana in perpetuity is someone who lacks the cause.and for him the lineage for parinirvana is completely nonexistent.(SAl [22,2123.3::12.19-13.2])This passage describes two kinds of agotra, namely, those who do not attainBuddhahood for a certain period of time, but can do so after the end of this period,and those who will never attain buddhahood. while it is conceivable that the expla-nation for the existence of those among the agotra with a possibility of attainingBuddhahood was omitted when explaining the various kinds of gotra, the omissionof any explanation of those with no possibility whatsoever of attaining buddhahood,not mentioned anywhere else in the Mahayanasutralamkara, invites the charge of adeficiency in its theories. The Mahayanasutralamkara included the agotra with nc
potential for buddhahood so as to avoid any omissions in its explanation of gotramnd it did not actively propound the notion ofa gotra unable to attain buddhahood.There exist commentaries on the mahayanasutralamkara by Asvabhava, thoughtto have flourished around A.D.500,and by Sthiramati, thought to have lived circaA.d.510-570. sthiramati almost certainly wrote his commentary by expanding onthat by Asvabhava. with regard to the above passage, Asvabhava merely gives anexplanation based on the usage of the negative prefix a-, while sthiramati providesa more detailed exposition.while there is no evidence for the existence of a scheme consisting of the lineag.es of the three vehicles and the indeterminate lineage at the time when the verseand Vasubandhu's commentary were composed, it had gradually evolved by thetime of Asvabhava. but even in the case of Asvabhava's commentary it hardly seemslikely that he linked these to the agotra without any potential for buddhahood so a:to create a single scheme. whereas Asvabhava's commentary begins by commenting directly on Vasubandhu's commentary AT,p.5530:59a8f), Sthiramati adds"where it says 'a verse on the distinction of the lineage-less,, having earlier explained the lineage of the sravaka, the lineage of the pratyekabuddha, the lineage ofthe bodhisattva, and the indeterminate lineage, it now explains the lineage-less'〓AVbh, p.5531:52b3ff). whereas Asvabhava clearly refers to the lineages of the thre4vehicles and the indeterminate lineage in his commentary on verse 6, but does nolink them directly to the verse on agotra, there is clear evidence in Sthiramati'scommentary of an intent to create a scheme of five gotra. here one can see the wa)in which the scheme of five gotra gradually evolved. it should of course be notedthat there is no evidence of sthiramati's having emphasized and actively propound.ed here or elsewhere the idea of a five-gotra system.5. It is to be surmised that at the time when Xuanzang was studying undelSilabhadra at Nalanda, a five-gotra system that included the agotra with no poten-tial for buddhahood was not attracting very much attention. There is, however, apossibility that around the same time or a little earlier Sthiramati was formulating ascheme of five gotra at valabhi. Xuanzang probably did not meet Sthiramati whenhe visited valabhi, but according to a later account he studied under one ofSthiramati's disciples.ll) when one takes these circumstances into account, it is pos
sible that the idea of a five-gotra system introduced by Xuanzang to China derivecfrom a current of thought associated with valabhi. It is at any rate certain that theidea of a five-gotra system as found in china did not exist in the Indian Yogacaraschool, or at least, even if a scheme along these lines can be found in Sthiramati'scommentary, it had not developed into a theory that was attracting much interest.References
Kitsukawa Tomoaki橘川智昭.1999."enjiki ni yoru gosho kakubetsu no kotei mi tsuit〓eniiki shiso ni taisuru kaijoteki kaishaku no saikento -"円測による五性各別の肯定について-円測思想に対する皆成的解釈の再検討-.bukkyogaku仏教学40pp.95-117.
Matsumoto Shiro松本史朗1982. "Yuishikiha no ichijo shiso ni tsuite- ichiio shiso nckenkyu()"唯識派の一乗思想について-一乗思想の研究(〓). komazawa daigakubukkyo Gakubu Ronshu駒澤大学佛教学部論集13,pp.290-312.Sakuma hidenori佐久間秀範.2006."Yugagyoha no jissen riron ga kyogi riron ni kawarutoki"〓伽行派の実践理論が教義理論に変わる時.teisugaku Shiso Ronshu哲学・思想論集31,pp. l-15.Takasaki jikido高崎直道.1980.ryogakyo〓伽経.butten koza仏典講座17. Tokyo: da.izo Shuppan大蔵出版.Yoshimura Makoto吉村誠.2000."To shoki ni okeru gosho kakubetsu setsu ni tsuite-Enjiki to ki no giron o chushin ni"唐初期における五姓各別説について-円測と基の議論を中心に.Nihon bukkvo Gakkai Nenpo日本仏教学会年報65.pp.179-196.-.2004. "yuishiki gakuha no gosho kakubetsu setsu nitsuite"唯識学派の五姓各別説について.komazawa daigaku bukkyo Gakubu kenkyi kiyo駒澤大学佛教学部研究紀要62,pp.223-258.iutsu kyokai東京技術協会-2005.Chugoku yuishiki shisoshi nyimon中国唯識思想史入門.tokyo: Tokyo Gi-Because of strict restrictions on space, all notes have had to be omitted. reference shouldbe made to my articles in Japanese dealing with the same subject, including aparinirvana-dharma, which it was not possible to deal with here(This study is supported in part by a Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research ((2005-2007)from jSps)
(Key words) gotra, agotra, Yogacara, five-gotra system(professor, university of tsukuba, ph.d & d.litt)
