udayana's critique of the intrinsic Theory of Validity:With respect to the origination of the ValidityShdataisei
Since Mimamsaka kumarila (ca7c) posed a problem about whether the validi-ty and invalidity of cognition are, respectively, intrinsic (svatah) or extrinsic (para.〓ah), Naiyayikas and buddhists argued over this problem and generated their owitheories, mainly in opposition to kumarila's Intrinsic Theory of validity.one of the issues against the background of this problem is the authorship ofvedic scripture, whether we should postulate the omniscient author of the veda, oiwhether the veda does not have any author because of its eternality.In this paper, i will clarify the method of udayana's critique of the IntrinsicTheory of validity, especially with respect to its origination upatti), in the 2ndChapter (stabaka) of the Nyayakusumaniali (Nkus).udayana, against the opponent's Intrinsic Theory of validity, does not put for-ward his own theory but puts forward instead a third theory in which the intrinsicand extrinsic properties are reversed, and compares it to the opponent's theory. bydoing so, he criticizes the opponent's theory on the grounds that it leaves room forhe existence of another antagonistic theory(*stpratisadhana).A similar critique of the intrinsic Theory of validity is found in theTattvasamgraha (tS) of Santaraksita (ca8c). however, there is a difference betweenthe theory of udayana and the theory of Santaraksita; whether the antagonistic the-ory put forward to the opponent is argued at the ontological level or at the epistemo-logical level.1critique of the lntrinsic Theory of validity in the NkusIn the Nkus, the svath/paratah problem of validity/invalidity is discussed atthe opening of the 2nd chapter (k.la) and in his auto-commentary thereon. The con-tent is divided into two parts; the former argument refers to the ontological aspectof the validity (upatti) and the latter refers to the epistemological aspect ofit (napti).
udayana's critique of the lntrinsic Theory of validity (t. Shida)(29Among the two arguments, the issue of the former argument on utpatti is, alfirst, the validity and invalidity of general cognition. Afterwards, the issue is fo-cused on those of verbal cognition. The opponent shows various reasons why thecausal factor for the validity is not the guna, or epistemic excellence, but is in factthe absence of the dosa, or fault. udayana, when he criticizes those assertions. doesnot put forward Naiyayika theory but puts forward the third theory as the intrinsicTheory of Invalidity.To explain, the opponent's theory is that the validity and invalidity are ontolog-ically determined by means of, respectively, the absence and presence of the dos(henceforth I refer to this theory as intrinsic "arising" of the validity). on the other handUdayana puts forward the intrinsic Theory of invalidity which asserts that bothproperties are ontologically determined by means of the presence/absence of theguna (henceforth, intrinsic "arising" of the invalidity). by doing so, udayana shows thatboth theories are compatible whether the causal factor for the validity is the dos-bhava or the guna. (Nkus pp.2111-2171)Lastly, udayana, having made the opponent admit that we can establish thetwo compatible theories to explain the properties of the validity and the invalidityregarding mundane verbal cognition, then proceeds to a discussion of those proper-ties of the Veda which are not attributed to any author.2)IArqument presupposing the vedaas being authorless (NKus p.21.2-4)The opponent, presupposing that no-one composed the veda, proposes a syllogismwhich leads to the validity of the veda. For, the absence of the author, which meansthe absence of the ontological cause, implies the absence of the dos in the causeAgainst this, udayana shows the antagonistic syllogism which leads to the opposite conclusion on the grounds of the third theory (ie. intrinsic "arising" of the inva-idity). By doing so, he points out that the opponent's theory results in an undesirable
consequence of having another antagonistic syllogism(*satpratipaksa)■Argument presupposing the generality of the validity (Nkus pp.2-220.2)then the opponent asserts that we cannot have even any doubt about thevalidity of the veda on the grounds of intrinsic validity at the epistemological level,which means that we are inclined to believe or accept what manifests initially onuur cognition as true (henceforth i refer to this as intrinsic "acceptance" of the validity).Nkus pp.214-220. svata eva pramanyaniscayah,kinu sankamatram anenapaniyate,dosanibandhanatvat tsya tadabhave 'bhavat, ato nedam anumanavat satpratisadhani-kartum ucitam iti cen na/ gunanivrttinibandhanayah snkayah sulabhatvat/[Opponent] The determination of the validity is precisely intrinsic. but only the doubi[about the validity of the veda] is removed by this (ie. the property of not having the〓osa of the speaker). for, the doubt is based on the dosa, and there is not [doubt about thevalidity of the veda] in the case that [the veda] does not have it (ie. the dosa). Thereforewe cannot let it (ie. the justification of the veda based on the intrinsic "acceptance" of thsvalidity) have another antagonistic theory(*stprarisadhana). [udayana:] [lt is] not [cor-rectl. because we can easily have doubt based on the lack of the guna.In the above argument, the opponent asserts, first of all, the principle of the intrin-sic "acceptance" of the validity, which means that a cognizer believes or acceptwhat manifests on his cognition in the meanwhile.4) Moreover, he asserts that theproperty of not having the dosa of the speaker removes the doubt about the validityof the veda. Therefore, the intrinsic "arising" of the validity, which means that thevalidity and the invalidity are ontologically determined respectively by means of thepresence/absence of the dosa, with support from the intrinsic "acceptance" of thevalidity, rules out even the doubt about the validity of the veda. The opponent there-fore concludes that we cannot make any antagonistic theory against it.Then udayana shows the possibility of doubt about the validity of the vedabased on the theory of intrinsic "arising" of the invalidity. however, he does notpropose the antagonistic theory against the intrinsic "acceptance" of the validity, butrather states in the above argument that we have doubt about the validity of theVeda on the grounds of the absence of the guna, and to come to doubt somethingimplies acceptance of the thing as true in the meanwhile.5)Nonetheless, udayana criticizes the intrinsic "arising" of the validity on ac-
count that it cannnot prove the authority of the veda because there remains the pos.sibility of the intrinsic "arising" of the invalidity.〓critique of the lntrinsic Theory of validity in the tswe can confirm a similar critique of the intrinsic Theory of validity in the TS ofSantaraksita. what differentiates the critique of udayana and that of Santaraksita isas follows; while udayana shows the third theory (ie. the intrinsic Theory of invalidity)only when he argues the ontological aspect of validity, Santaraksita mainly showshe third theory regarding the epistemological aspect. Therefore we can say thatudayana's third theory is intrinsic "arising" of the invalidity, and Santaraksita's thirctheory is intrinsic "acceptance" of the invalidity.6i■unrestricted Theory of buddhists Several later texts, such as the Sarvadarsanasamgraha (SDS, ca l4c), state that buddhists asserted the intrinsic Theoryof invalidity.7) But more than a few scholars have refuted such a fact.8)For example,in the25th chapter of the TS, Santaraksita having counterposed the restricted theo-〓y*niyamapaksa) and the unrestricted theory(*aniyamapaksa) states explicitly thaBuddhists accept the following unrestricted theory; the validity of some kind ofcognition is intrinsic, and the validity of other cognition is extrinsic.9)Tsk.2944p.9387-8 yenaikaih svta eveti proccair miyama ucyate/ kincit svato 'nyahkincit parais caniyamo matah//For, some [polemicists] assert loudly the restriction, "[validity is] presicely intrinsic." onthe other hand, some [polemicists] (ie. buddhists) hold the unrestriction, "Some [validityof cognition] is intrinsic, and some [validity of cognition] is extrinsic."Incidentally, InAMI[1993]and kRASSER [2003]reported that the prototype argu.ment of this unrestricted theory had been already stated by devendrabuddhi andsakhvabuddhi (c7c),and that later buddhists after Santaraksita instead state theunrestricted theory almost solidly.10)intrinsic theory of lnvalidity in the ts however, the intrinsic Theory ofInvalidity is hypothetically referred to in the TS. For example, verses kk.3000,3001show the intrinsic Theory of Invalidity, with small parts of kumarila's verseschanged.ll) There, the intrinsic Theory of invalidity is stated as follows; ifMimamsakas assert the intrinsic Theory of validity, then we can assert the oppositein the same manner.!2)
32)udayana's critique of the lntrinsic Theory of validity (t. ShidA)〓
This Intrinsic Theory of invallidity in the TS is argued at the epistemologicallevel. it would be, regardless of whether it is valid or not, intrinsic "acceptance" ofthe invalidity. The keystone of the theory is to doubt the validity of every cognitionin principle. Therefore this theory seems to be an extreme skepticism. And it represents the point that differs from the argument of udayana in the Nkus3conclusion
Regarding the svatah/paratah problem, udayana shows the third theory as theintrinsic Theory of Invalidity in the Nkus, as did Santaraksita in the TSSantaraksita, however, hypothetically showed the intrinsic Theory of Invalidityin the TS. his theory is argued mainly at the epistemological level, and thereforeseems to be a theory of intrinsic "acceptance" of the invalidity, which is a kind ofskepticism.
on the other hand, udayana shows the intrinsic Theory of invalidity only whenhe argues the origination of the validity, which explains the origination of validityinvalidity on the grounds of the presence/absence of the gu e. intrinsic "arising'of the validity). but he does not propose such a theory at the epistemological levelThis means that udayana should have differentiated clearly the svath/paratah prob-lem into the two aspects of origination (upatti ) and justification (napti ).This critique of udayana disadvantages the opponent's theory in that it leavesroom for the existence of another antagonistic theory(*stpratisadhana). Moreover, itis estimated that the concept of the *satpratisadhana is something which has merelygeneralized the concept of having another antagonistic syllogism stpratipaksa) inhe case of inference, which is one of the logical fallacies (hetvabhasa)3)(Abbreviations & Referencesnkus: Nyayakusumanjali, sri padmaprasada upadhyaya & sri dhundhiraja sastri (ed.),Kashi Sanskrit Series30.Varanasi.1957rS(p) tattvasamgraha (njika), S. d. Shastri (ed.), varanasi, 1968SASTR1[19281"Forgotten karikas of Kumarila," The lournal of oriental Research -dras l, pp.131-144InAMi[993]"Theory of truth in the buddhist Epistemological School: devendrabuddhiand Sakyabuddhi (bukkyo Ronri gakuha no Shinri-ron: devendrabuddhi to Sakyabud-dhi), studies in original buddhism and mahayuana buddhism in commemoration of late
Prof. dr. fumimaro wTabe, pp.85-118.ono [2002]"On anumanabadhitanumana: the nyaya's procedure of judging two Inferences conflicting each other (Suiri wa suiri wo haigeki suruka)", studies of buddhist cu-ure (bukkyo bunka kenkyi Ronshu),pp.3-19.SHia [200]"on the causal Factor for validity at the origination of cognition: whatire the guna and the general cause of cognition in naiyayikas' paratahpramanyavad?,lournal of indological Studies 18,pp.ll4-136.*As to other references, see those in my article SHida [2006].1)Though ipropose this schema for the sake of convenience, it might not be relevant. Folhe actual Mimamsakas must not have needed any causal factor for the validity. Therefore.even the expression "vlalidity]'s causal factor" itself might not have been accepted byem.2)cf. NKus p.2171-2: pauruseyavisaye iyam astu wyavastha, apauruseye tuosanivrttyaiva pramanyam iti..3)NKus p.21- tathapi vedanam apauruseyatvesiddhe, apetavaktrdosatvad evapramanyam seisyati, tatah sddhe pramanye gunabhave piad ii dosabhava ewa hetur akaranam guna iti cen m/ apetavaktrgunatvena satpratipak-qprasangat/4)commentaries of Nkus also interpret that the opponent here dis-usses the intrinsic "acceptance" of the validity. cf. Nkusbo pp.23523-236.1, Nkusprap.214-6.5)regarding whether the intrinsic "acceptance" of the validity means the in-rinsic justification or not, Udayana will argue in the following section of the Nkus abouinapti.6)Ihave mentioned the demarcation problem between the ontological aspect (u-patti ) and epistemological aspect (inapti) of the validity in SHida [2006].7)cf. inaMI[1993:p.l13].8)InAM1[1993,hatTOR[997],kRASSER [2003].9)cf. tSP ad TSk.3122p.981.12-15,InAMi[1993:pp.-88],hatO997:p.368].10)cf. hattOr[1997:pp.36b-39.6].11)ts kk.3000,300l: tasmat svato'pramanatvam sarvatrautsargikam sthitam/ badhakaranadustatvajnanabhavad apodyate// tatha bodhatmakatvenabuddheh praptapramanata/ yatharthajnanahetutthagunajnanad apodyatet/, cf. Svc k.53SASTR[928].12)cf. TS k.2999p.954.1-2amayaivopapattya syad apramanyam apisvatah/ tatrapi sakyate waktum yasman nyayo yam idrsah "lnvalidity would be intrinsicloo just in the same logic. For, [we] can state the following logic regarding it (ie. invalid-ity)" cf. TSk.2845p.911.11-12.13)comparing the two concepts of satpratipaksa andsatpratisadhana, the former means that an inferential syllogism has another antagonisticsyllogism which leads to the opposite conclusion ono [2002]).on the other hand, itis supposed that the latter means we can establish two compatible theories, both of whichhave no deciding clincher. At least, we can safely say that udayana takes something dif-erent from inferential syllogism into account, because he let the opponent state "unlikeinference (na . anumanavat)"(Key words> udayana, pramanyavada, satpratisadhana, Nyayakusumanjali(Part-time lecturer, Tokai university, d.litt.)
