〓n the place of nimitta in the mahayanasutralamkaraIn the context of the parikalpitalaksanaMaTSUDakuninori■introduction The term nimitta plays an important role in discussions of variou:doctrines of the Yogacara school. As is well-known, however, its classification irthe trisvabhava theory is not fixed.l) what we are concerned with here is the follow-ing fact: mimitta is defined in the madhyantavibhaga MAv) as the nature which depends on others (paratantrasvabhava), while the Mahayanasutralamkara (MSA) treatsnimitta in the context of that which is wrongly imagined (parikapiia), even thoughthese two works are thought to have similar tendencies in their thought. This fact isvery interesting when one takes into consideration that the viniscayasamgrahani,which seems to predate these two works, gives the same classification as the MAv.while the mahayanasamgraha, which took over the framework of the MSA, followsthe classification given in the MSA, at least as far as nimitta is concerned.of course, one of the reasons for this difference is that the MSA does not treanimitta in the context of the pancavastu theory, unlike other works, but when oneakes into account the significance of the term nimitta in the Yogacara school, itwould seem reasonable to suppose that this reflects some difference in the under-standing of the term nimitta itself.In this paper, I would like to clarify the interpretation of nimitta given in theMSA and how it is recognized as the characteristic of that which is wrongly imag-ined by reexamining the MSA and its commentary by sthiramati.■the interpretation qiven in the MSA First of all, the MSA situates mimitta inthe trisvabhava theory in a passage in which three characteristics are mentionedwith regard to the three svabhavas. here the MSA explains this without relating iito the pancavastu theory, as mentioned above. The MSA statesyathajalparthasamjnaya nimittam ya vasana/lasmad apy arihavikhyanam parikapitalaksanam/8
"The nimitta of a notion of an object in accordance with speech (yathajalparthasamina),its impression, and the appearance of an object which arises from it, [these] are of thecharacteristic of that which is wrongly imagined."laksanam samasena trividham parikalpitadilaksanam/ tatra parikapitalaksanam trividham yathajalparthasamjnaya mimittam y c jpasya vasana tsmac ca vasanad yrihah khyati vyavaharakusalanam vinapi yathajaparthasamjnaya/ tatra yathabhilapanarthasamina caitasiki yathajalparthasamjna/ tsya yd alambanam n nimiittam/ evamyc c parikalpyate yatas ca karanad vasanatas tad ubhaym parikalpitalaksanam atra-bhipretam/
"The characteristic, to put it briefly, is threefold, [ie. ] the characteristic of that which iswrongly imagined and so on. Among them, the characteristic of that which is wronglyimagined is threefold: the nimitta of a notion of an object in accordance with speech, theimpression of it, [ie.] speech, and an object which appears from it, [ie. ] the impressioneven without the notion of an obiect in accordance with speech. in this case, the mentafactor which is the notion of an object in accordance with an expression is the notion of arobject in accordance with speech. That which is a cognitive support (alambana) of it is thenimitia of it. in this way, that which is wrongly imagined and the impression as a causefrom which [it arises], these two are, in this case, intended to be the characteristic of thatwhich is wrongly imagined."yathanamartham arthasya namnah prakhyanata ca yaasatkalpanimittam hi parikalpitalaksanam/39/"For, wheny there is an appearance of an object and a name in accordance with aname and an obiect, the nimitta of the unreal conception is the characteristic of thatwhich is wrongly imagined."pparaparyayo yatha nama carthas ca yathanamartham arthasya namnas ca prakhyanatdyarhanamarthaprakhyanata/ yadi yathanamarthah khyati yathartham va nama iity etad abhu-taparikalpalambanam parikalpitalaksanam/etavad dhi parikalpyate yad uta nama va ar-tho veti/
"There is another facet (aparaparyayo). [That is to say,] in accordance with a name anm obiect' means 'as a name and an object are.' 'There is an appearance of an object anda name' means there is an appearance in accordance with a name and an object. if (yadi)an object appears in accordance with a name or [ifl a name appears in accordance withan object, then this cognitive support of the abhutaparikalpa is the characteristic of thatwhich is wrongly imagined. For it is only a name or an object that is wrongly imagined."
That is to say, as regards k.38,the characteristic of that which is wrongly imagined is summarized as being twofold: that which is wrongly imagined ( the nimittaand an appearance of an object which arises from an impression) and an impression itselfwhich is its origin. it should be mentioned that the nimitia here is understood as thecognitive support of 'a notion of an object in accordance with speech' or an obiectof something imagined but not as a cause in general.Next, in k.39,the MSA explains this characteristic in a somewhat different way.Hitherto this explanation seems to have been understood quite separately from theunderstanding presented in k.8,2)but this passage, at least as long as we follow theMSAbh's interpretation, is thought to describe the above-mentioned matter fromanother facet (aparaparyaya),iie., from another point of view. In other words, thispassage explains supplementarily and more clearly that only when an object and aname appear in accordance with each other, namely, only when the imaginatiorfunctions in such a way, is the nimitta regarded as the characteristic of that which isnrongly imagined. This interpretation of this passage would be accepted in that theMSAbh uses yadi instead of yd', which appears in the karika portion. Moreover.this is also implied by the fact that Sthiramati explains these two verses withou1making any clear distinction between them, as is mentioned below■sthiramatir's interpretation next the interpretaion given in the sitralamkarcvrttibhasya (Avbh) will be examined in brief.As regards k.38,the SaVbh explains "the nimitta of a notion of an object in ac.cordance with speech' with concrete examples such as a pot and cloth, while it ex-plains 'the appearance of an object which arises from the impression' as an object ofthe imagination which is not affected by verbal convention. but it is noticeable thatin explaining the characteristic of that which is wrongly imagined, the Savh putsmore emphasis on whether or not the imagination arises than the MSAbh does.Next, concerning k.39,'an appearance [of an object and a name] in accordancewith a name and an object' is interpreted as 'to imagine (og pa) or to grasp ('pa) that there is an object in accordance with a name and that there is a name in ac-cordance with an obiect, and the Savbh then considers it as the characteristic ofhat which is wrongly imagined.) Subsequently, the SaVbh explains the nimitta ofthe unreal conception (asatkapbhitaparikalpa) as a name or an object in the
same way as the MSAbh, but it seems to regard not the nimitta itself but the imagi-nation directed at the mimitta as the characteristic of that which is wrongly imag-ined, contrary to the interpretation given in the MSAbh.However, in the commentary concerning the last portion of the MSAbh, theSAVbh explains a name and an object as the characteristic of that which is wronglyimagined in the same way as the MSAbh.4)This difference, if it exists, seems to be due to a difference in their interpretationsof y' appearing in the MSA. In other words, the MSAbh interprets it in the senseof yadi", while the SAVbh interprets it as the characteristic itself of that which iswrongly imagined.)in addition, the savbh seems to consider fundamentally thatthe fact that it appears' (prakhyanata) and 'to imagine it' are the same. Thus thecharacteristic of that which is wrongly imagined, which is indicated by y', is inter.preted in the SaVbh as 'to imagine' or 'to grasp', which is equivalent to appearanceHowever, since the SaVbh regards a cognitive support as the characteristic ofthat which is wrongly imagined in k.38and in the last part ofk.39,and since thereis no positive reason for the sAVbh to give an interpretation contrary to that of theMSAbh, it seems more appropriate to assume that the savbh basically considersthe nimitta, which is an obiect of a notion or the imagination, to be the characteris-tic of that which is wrongly imagined.6)〓ConclusonIn the above we have reexamined the interpretation of the nimittgiven in the MSA together with sthiramati's commentary. As a consequence, thefollowing seems to have become clear:・In the MSA, in the context of the characteristic of that which is wrongly imag-ined. the fundermental meaning of the term nimitta is thought to be a cognitivesupport of a notion or an object of the imagination.・The MSA regards the nimitta as the characteristic of that which is wrongly imag.ined from the viewpoint that it is an object of the wrong imagination, and k.3seems to add supplementarily that the intervention of the imagination is the indis-pensable factor.・The SAvh focuses on the explanation of the role of the imagination in explain-ing the characteristic of that which is wrongly imagined, but the nimitta seems tobe basically interpreted as an object, and also to be recognized as the characteris-
tic of that which is wrongly imagined.MSA/h: n. FuNahaSHi, ed., "some problems in the Mahayanasutralamkara and cor-rigenda of the Mahayanasutralamkara chapter xi)" oiani daigaku kenkyu nenpo52,2000,pp. 1-69.SAVbh: o. hayaSHiMA, ed., "chos yons su tshol bahi skabs or dharnaparyesty adhikara, part il," nagasaki daigaku kyoiku Gakubu jinun kagaku kenkyuHokoku 27,1978,pp.73-119.1)this fact has been pointed out in the cheng weishi lu成唯識論』)and previousstudies, e.g., ye, ayue [19911 "sansho to goji to no sogo kankei ," jibs21-1,1972,pp80-87(in Japanese); k. yokoyaMA [1976]: "nimitta (so) ni tsuite," bukkyogaku l, pp.88-111(in Japanese), k. Hyoo [1991]: "sansho-setsu ni okeru yuishiki mukyo no igi(2)" otami gakuho 70-4,pp. l-23in japanese); id.[2006]: "sansho-setsu to yuishikmukyo," olani daigaku kenkyi Nenpo58,pp. 1-70,1-3(in japanese).2)cf. Hyoo199l:esp. p.5l, M. TakeMuRA, yuishiki Sansho-setsu no kenkyu, Shunju-sha, tokyo, 1995(in japanese), esp. p.95,etc.)Savbh ad MSA, hayASHIMA ed.104.20ff.; ad MSAbh, hayaSHIMA ed.057f.4)hayaSHIMA ed. 105.15ff.5)This interpretation given in the Savbh is very natural when considered in terms of aelative (ya), and it may reflect the original understanding of the karika portion of theMSA. but we are here not concerned with this question.6)lt should be noted that an expression such as atha vd', which we frequently encounterin Sthiramati's works, is not employed. we may have to reexamine the interpretationppearing in the former part of k.39by taking into consideration questions pertainingto the Tibetan translation(Key words> nimitta, parikalpitalaksanaGraduate student, university of tokyo, jSps Research Fellow (DC2))
