The vimalakirtinirdesa andhe (Sarvabuddhavisayavatara-inanalokalamkaraYonezawA YoshiyasuIn1999,a delegation of Taisho university, for the first time as foreigners, waallowed to make researches into the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved at the PotalePalace in Lhasa, the capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region. one of the most inter-esting and important discoveries at that time was the bundle in which completeSanskrit manuscripts of the vimalakirtinirdesVkN) and the (Sarvabuddhavisaya-vatara-jnanalokalamkara (a) are included, for both Sanskrit MSS had been con-sidered lost so far. since the press release of the discovery in december2001, tex1critical studies of both Sanskrit texts have been gradually established: the facsimileedition of both MSS as well as3 volume books in041),a critical edition of jAAin20042),and a Sanskrit edition of VkNin20063).during the preparation of thesepublications, the present author as a member of VkN Study Group has felt that weshould put more emphasis upon the combination of VkN and jAA, for it is theundeniable fact that the MSS are sponsored by the same person and hand-copied bythe same scribe at almost the same time.4) with reviewing MSS features, the presentauthor will discern an intention of the sponsor/scribe and the tibetan monk ircharge of MS preservation belowMSS Features
The script of both MSS can be categorized as the "proto-bengali-cum-proto-Maithilli"5)except on the cover folio (la) where tibetan dbu-med is employed. it isvery probable that notes on the cover folio were written by an anonymous Tibetanmonk who was in charge of MSS preservation.MSS of JAA(32leaves in total6)) and VkN(78leaves in total) fall into the fol-lowing text-components: l) cover folio (la),2) Main text,3)Scriputre title,4) yedharma formula,5)Dedication, and 6) colophon. besides 2) Main text, each text is
8)the (Sarvabuddhavisayavatara-inanalokalamkara y. yonezAwa)read as follows.)Cover folio (la)JAA: aryasarvabuddhavisayavataraijnanalokalamkaraphags pa sangs rgyas thams cad kyi yul la 'jug pa ye shes snang ba brgyan gyi mdoVkN: abhiratilokadhatvanayana aksobhyatathagatadarsanajAA: aryasarvabuddhavisayavataraijnanalokalamkara nama(32a) mahayanasutrammngon par dga' ba'i jig rten mi 'khrug pa'i mi'khrug pa'i zhing bkod2)Main text (ja: lbl-3lb7, Vkn lbl-78a4)3)Scripture titlesamaptam〓3lb7-32al)Vkn Missing
4)ye dharma formula (jAa32al; vkN:78a4)ve dharma hetuprabhava hetum tesam tathagato hy avadat /tesam ca yo nirodha evamvadi mahasramanah"Those phenomena which arise from a cause, the tathagata declared what is theircause and what is their cessation. Thus, the great sramana has spoken."5)dedication a32al-2;VkN78a4-5)deyadharmo yam pravaramahayanayayinah bhiksusiladhvajasya yad atra punyamtad bhavatv acaryopadhyayamatapitrpurvamgamam krtva sakalasatvaraser anut-tarainanaphalavaptaya iti //"This is a dedication of a monk siladhvaja, a follower of the preeminentMahayana. whatever virtue here, may it be for attaining the results of the su-preme knowledge of a mass of all living-beings beginning with his instuctors,preceptors, and his parents".6)Colophon
JaA:maharaiadhirajasrimadgopaladevarajye samvat l2 sravanadine30 likhitamidam upasthayakacandokeneti //i-3)"This was hand-copied by a [royal] servant candoka on the 3oth day of thesravana month (july-august) in1h regnal year of the holy king gopala.the preeminent king of kings.VKN: srimadgopaladevarajye samvat l2bhadradine29 likhiteyam upasthayaka-candokeneti /78a5-6)〓

the (Sarvabuddhavisayavatara-)jnanalokalamkara (Y. YoneZAwa)("This is a hand-copy of a [royal] servant Candoka on the29m day of thebhadra month (August-september) inhh regnal year of the holy kingGopala."
As is shown above, both MSS have almost the same textual organization. Fromboth colophons, the common information is obtainable: the same sponsor.Siladhvaja; the same scribe, Candoka, the same year, the l2h regnal year of theKing Gopala.7) unfortunately, no other information about the sponsor and the scribeis available for the present author. The king Gopala is to be identified as one of thethree kings in the Pala dynasty that ruled over north bengal and bihar, i.e., the east-ern india, from the latter half of 8mh century until the end of 12mh century or the verybeginning of13 century. taking the script of MSS into consideration, it is reason-able to assume that both colophons refer to the king Gopala iii (ca. 1128-43or ca1143-1158)8).we know from both colophons, moreover, that the hand-copy of jAAwas completed first, and then that of VkN about a month later. incidentally, jAA isput on the top of VkNin the MSS bundle at the Potala Palace.on the other hand, two important diffrences are noticed between VkN and jaAMSS. First, VkN has no scripture title just after the main text. The title"vimalakirtinirdesa" appears within the main text, i.e., in the end of chapter 12(77b7)9),but no title indication of VkN is available just as in the case of JAA.Second, the Sanskrit title on the cover folio of VkNis none other than that of chap-ter Xi. This suggests that the tibetan monk who might have been in charge of theMS preservation regarded the chapter xIas a highlight of the entire vkn1.An intention of the sponsor/scribelt is not easy to answer the question why JaA and VKN were combined by theponsor, siladhvaja, or the scribe, candoka. however, it seems possible to assumethat jAA had priority over VkN, at least for the sponsor/scribe, on the basis of cir-cumstantial evidence mentioned above, i.e., l) dating of the hand-copy A washand-copied before VkN) and2 ) no scriputre title just after the main text in Vkn. Itis indeed true that JAA citend in the Ratnagotravibhagha-hayanottaratantra)plays an importat role in a formation of the so-called tahagatagarbha philosophy,although no technical term as such is employed in the text. As the doctrinal con-
)0)the (Sarvabuddhavisayavatara-jnanalokalamkara v. yonezawA)tents of this scripture, it is notable that the characteristics of tathagata' and 'bodhi'are explained by various negative expressions, e.g., no-origination and no-destruc-tion (anutpada-, anirodha-), etc.ll) Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that jaa is a typi-cal Mahayana scripture.The hypothesis that VKN occupies a supplementary status to jaa for the MSssponsor/scribe seems supported by the title of chapter xion the cover folio of VkNMS. In chapter xiof VkN, vimalakirti expounds 'how to see' the tathagata andmiraculously shows the Abhirati universe of the Tathagata Aksobhya, from whichhe descended. The tathagata Aksobhya has been well known since the early stageof Mahayana buddhism. From the viewpoint of the Tibetan who noted 'abhiratilo-kadhatvanayana aksobhyatathagatadarsana' on the cover folio of VkNMS. howev-er, the image of the tathagata Aksobhya might have been limited to one of fivedhyani buddhas in Vajrayanism or tantrayanism.if the dating of MSS is taken into consideration, it is very probable that the pre.dominant ideas and creeds of the sponsor/scribe were worth while to be investigat-ed. In bengal, the Pala period is said to have introduced a new school of art, theEastern Indian School of Medieval art or simply Pala School of Art.!2) it is alsowell known that the activities of famous buddhist scholars are recorded in tibetarhagio-historiographies, e.g., Taranatha's Chos 'byung, Pag sam jon zang, etc., all ofwhich contribute to the understandings of a history of Pala dynasty. Furthermore, itis to be noted that there are many other Sanskrit MSS dated in this Pala period.13)n place of conclusiorThe above argument is based upon nothing but a hypothesis. Nonetheless, it woulcbe certain that intentions of the person in charge of MS preservation as well as thesponsor/scribe are understood under their cultural context. All that the present au-thor wants to propose is appreciation of their intentions and endeavors, for theymade us possible to conduct text critical studies on the important scriptures, JaAand VKN.
Appendix
The present paper does not go into detail about the common features between th
he (Sarvabuddhavisayavatara-jnanalokalamkara y. YoNezawa)(61main texts of jaA and VkN. however, this topic was communicated in the panediscussion entitled "The Thought and culure in the vimalakirtinirdesa" organizecin the afternoon of 13h September, the second day of the57h congress held at Taishcuniversity. prof. TakahaShi hisao of Taisho university introduces that the first 〓verses of〓38in JAA are equal to the 4 verses (12-15)of sl inVkN, among which,notably, verse 15of 〓1iVkNconsists of pada 4cd and 5ab of 〓38in ja. it isknown that the verses of jAA are cited in the texts of Tantirc buddhist masters, e.g.,buddhaguhya who wrotes pindartha commentary on the Mahavairocanasutra.Advayavajra, Naro-pa, etc. According to Prof. TAkahashi, it is remarkable that theextract version of JAA, the dasheng wenshushili pusa sn fofashen li(大聖文殊師利菩薩讃佛法身禮,t. no. 1195),is listed in kukai's goshorai Mokuroku, the report tothe court and bibliography of the works brought back to japan from China. profARAMAki Noritoshi of otani university indicates that 'abhutaparikalpa-', one of thekeywords in the Yogacara philosophy, occurs in both textsl4).1)Study Group on buddhist Sanskrit literature ed.: kieSA and jN-〓okkRa transliterated Sanskrit text colated wiih tibetn nd chinese'anslations (part i. introduction to viMAlakirinIRdeSA and jnaNaLokA.LAMkARA, Part ll.viMAlakiirdeSA: transliterated Sanskrit text collatecwith tibetan and chinese translations, Partiii. jnalokAlAMkARa: transliter-ated Sanskrit Text collated with tibetan and Chinese Translations.), Taisho universit-press, Tokyo 2004.(The volume "part l" is indicatedy by "introduction" below.2)kIMuRa takayasu, otsuka Nobuo, kiMuRa Hideaki, and TAkahaSHI hisao ed.:"sarvabuddhavisayavatarainanalokalamkara nama mahayanasutra Sanskrit text, irkobodaishi kukai's Thought and culiure, Felicitation volumes on the occasion of dr.kicho onozuka's 70th birthday, ed. by buzoffice of Shingon Studies at Taisho uni-versity and the committee of publication of the felicitation volumes on the occasion otdr. kicho onozuka's 70th birthday, Nomburu, Tokyo 2004,vol2,pp.l-90.3)Study Group on buddhist Sanskrit literature ed.: vA SanskriiEditio bsed upon the mamuscript Ney Found at the Pot place, taisho Univer-sity Press, Tokyo2006.4)See 'general Survey on the MSS of VkN and ja' in'english Summary' (by thepresent author) of "lntroduction" (pp.73-75.). The present paper is intended to revise thesection combination of VkN and jaa' from another vicwpoint.5)G. roth: bhiksuni-yinaya, tibetan Sanskrit works Series vol. Xi, patna 1977,p.X〓
)the (Sarvabuddhavisayavatara-janalokalamkara (y. YoNezawA)See also "lntroduction" pp.91-92.6)As the fourth leaf is doubled, the editions of jaa mentioned above count 32 leavesin total.
7)the date descriptions in the colophons, ie., regnal year, month name in lunar systernd the day in solar system, is typical in the bengalese epigraphic data. See d.S. Sir.ar: iniepigraphy, Motilal banarsidass publishers, First Edition: delhi1965; repr.delhi1996,p.24lff. and Richard Salomon: iniepigraphy, a Guide to he Sudy ofInscriptions in snskrit, prakrit, and the other indo-aryn languages, centre for asianstudies, University of texus, Austin98,repr. Munshiram Manoharlal publishers Pvt.Ltd. New delhi1985,pp.171-172.In this respect, 'lunar calendar' in "introduction" p.76is to be amended as 'lunar-solar calendar.' This information together with the referencesowes to dr. horl Shin'ichiro, main researcher of the international Institute for buddhiststudies in the international College for Postgraduate buddhist Studies. The present au.hor appreciates his instruction8)concerning the reign of the king gopala iii, ca.ll28-43is based upon Susan L. Hun-ington & John c. Huntington : leaves from the bodhi tree : The art of Pala india(8th-12th centuries) and lis international legacy, dayton art institute in associationwith the university of washington press, dayton, ohio 1990,p.542,whereas ca.ll43-1158is upon jhunu bagchi : The history ad culture of the Palas of bengal and bihar(〓ir.750-c..d,Abhinav publications, Delhi1993,pp.36-48.9)'bha(b7)gavan aha / tasmat tarhi tvam anandeman dharmaparyayam vimalakirttinirddesam yamakaputavyatyastaniharam acintyadharmavimoksaparivarttam ity api dharay-emam dharmaparyayamVkN MS77b6-78al)10)See also 'on the Sanskirit Manuscript of the vimalakirtinirdesa' by the present author in ahapitaka Newsletter New Series no.8(ed. by editorial committee of theenglish translation of the chinese tripitaka c/o bukkyo dendo kyokai),2003,pp.6-7.11)see "introduction" pp.85-87.12)cf. Susan l. Huntington & John C. Huntington: ibid.; jhunu bagchi: ibid.; AnsuaSengupta: buddhist art of bengl From the 3rd century b.c. to The 1th Centurya..), Rahul publishing house, delhi1993; MORl Masahide: listings of buddhist Sculp-iures in the pldysty,A Study of the Formation and Developmant of the buddhistArtin South Asia, bulletin of the Research Institute of Esoteric buddhist Culture (Mikkyo bunka kenkyusho kiyo),Special issue vol.3,The Research Institute of EsotericBuddhist culture, koyasan university, koyasan2006;etc.(3)Most of Sanskrit MSS in the Pala period are referred to in jhunu bagchi: ibid., pp8-35.
14)jA〓19(MS18a5),vkNIv-〓l (MS29bl)vi-5(MS4b2-3),〓6(MS4b3.twice). incidentally, Dr. wataNAbE kaikyoku comments upon the Sanskrit fragmentsof jAa discovered in central Asia, which correspond to jAA MS17bl-18a5 immedately
he ( sarbudhavisasioki oNeza(63efore the occurrence of the term 'abhutaparikalpa-', as follows: "The contents of Ja〓have a close link with those of the bodhisattvapitaka. The idea of "the attainment ofhe bodhi of the tathagata because of no root and no dwelling" is found in VkN (for-[unately this part is available as a citation in the siksasamuccaya). if these points arinvestigated further, these fragments of jAa will be really interesting in both doctrinaland scriptural histories. however, it is not necessary to go into detail for the momenlSo, the report is ended." (waTaNabE kaikyoku: 〓khotan oyobi sono chinki no kobuts(*Khotan and its rare old manuscripts), in shinbukkyo 8-10,1907, repr. in kogeisu ze-nshu, tokyo 1977,upper vol., p.454.)(Keywords) vimalakirtinirdesa, jnanalokalamkara, Sanskrit Manuscript(Part-time lecturer, Taisho university新刊紹介
大正大学綜合佛教研究所梵語仏典研究会『梵文維摩経-ポタラ宮所蔵写本に基づく校訂-B5・126頁・定価5.20円大正大学出版会・2006年3月
