Haribhadra Suri on MomentarinesshARadaYasunori0. IntroductionHaribhadra suri (ca. 8c), a jaina svetambara monk and scholar, says that "if wedo not acknowledge things lasting for a certain period, we cannot explain the cau-sality". on the contrary, buddhists think that "things are not eternal"; which makesit a confrontation between two schools. Haribhadra reckons up various conflictsraised from thinking that things are momentary. In this research some of histhoughts are compared with thoughts of another school.The following references are used in this research: haribhadra's Anekantav-ddapravesa Avp) and anekantaiayapatoka jp). Furthermore, the sastravart-tasamuccysvs) by the same author is used for this articlel). The similarities anddifferences of these texts are highlighted in this research. in the comparison it isfound that avp,Ajp and SVS, have at least 2lcommon verses. These texts are verclose to each other.In this article references were made also from some non-jaina, especially buddhis-exts, Santaraksita's Tattvasamgraha (ts), Nagarjuna's mulamadhyamakakarika(MMk) to make clear the standpoint of haribhadra1.1two categories of criticism about momentarinessThe buddhist theory of momentariness was the target of criticisms from otherschools. Many of these criticisms can be classified into two categories. The firstcategory is a criticism led by the conflict between momentariness and causalitywhich we experience in fact in daily life. Except for assuming an eternal self, wecannot explain these experiences [causality al. For example, recollection smrti),recognition (pratyabhinana), etc. The second one is causality discussed by philo-sophically considering relations between cause and effect [causality b]. For exam-
Haribhadra Suri on Momentariness (Y. haRada)(35)ple, cause and effect are the same thing or not and they arise at the same time olnot. haribhadra, santaraksita and Nagarjuna discuss both view points.1.2Criticism about momentarinessIpointed out that in vP Haribhadra discussed momentariness, especially in theviewpoint of liberation from transmigration smsara)4)The discussion about the[causality A] including that problem will be further analyzed. The following eventcannot be explained by momentariness, so the eternal self has to be accepted:a. Relation between subject and object (grahyagrahakabhava)5).b. recollection (smrti)c. Recognizing that this thing is the same object as the past thing (pratyabhijnana).d. cessation of intention kutuhalaviramana).e. people receive the effect of their deeds and do not receive other's deeds6)〓. People who perform the practice can go to nirvana but those who do not cannot gcthere.
(a) according to the buddhist theory, things would disappear immediately afterarising. Therefore, we could not recognize an object previously experienced. (b')Even if we would remember the past things, there is extinction between the pastconsciousness and the present one. Therefore, we cannot remember any thing. (c')when we would recognize the thing which we recognized in the past, we couldidentify these objects by the establishment of the eternal subject ie. atman. (d' tobe interested in the present object or to hate the same one would be derived fromcontinuance of the past experience. (e') we agree with the discipline that we have toreceive the effect of our doing and the doer of the work and the receiver of the ef-fect are the same person. according to the theory of momentariness the act will dis-appear immediately and we have to receive the effect of the act of another person.(f) A person who makes good merit takes salvation from the bondage of this worldand who does not make one remains here. if we neglect this rule by the momentari-ness of the self, making good merit will become senseless.Haribhadra discusses causality in these points. Showing these conflicts betweenreal experience and the theory of momentariness is effective to buddhists7).
1.3discussion about [causality bon the other hand, the relationship between cause and effect can be analyzedphilosophically. haribhadra gives the following choices about cause and effect8)(1)cause and effect are the same thing or not.(2)Cause and effect arise at the same time.(3)quality (dharma) of the cause will be transferred to the effect(4)They have the relationship with the common thing(5)They make the one goal.(6)They arise from a specific cause.(7)effect arises immediately after a cause.(8)Cause produces a specific effect(1) if cause and effect are the same thing, we cannot distinguish between themSo, it is not causality. this theory that cause and effect are the same thing is main-tained by Samkhya school. The discussion that they are same or not is also seen inMMK20.19 and Nagariuna denies both cases.(2') if we think cause and effect ariseat the same time, when there is a cause, there is an effect. we cannot say they arecausality because there is no relation between them.(3')if quality of cause moves teffect and there is a specific relation between cause and effect, a part of a causecontinues to an effect. This phenomenon is not supported by the theory of momen.ariness. we can see this logic also in MMK20.9.Though haribhadra criticizesthat quality of the cause moves to effect in vp, nagarjuna denies eternal self inMMk.(4') even if cause and effect have something in common, buddhists do notacknowledge real universal things. They acknowledge only peculiar characteristicsnd deny the real commonality. if buddhists acknowledge the real commonality.they go into conflict with their own thought. Jainas acknowledge changing mode(paryaya) and lasting substance (dravya), so they have no conflict.(5) if cause andeffect make the one goal, they have to be at the same time, a moment before reach-ing the one goal. This case goes into the same conflict as "case2".(') if they arisefrom a specific cause, we cannot see preeminence on the cause. it is therefore im-possible to arise from a specific cause.(7) if effect arises immediately after cause,every thing which arises immediately after cause is the effect of a cause. buddhistsdo not claim that all things that arise immediately after cause are effects, but claim
that effect arises immediately after cause in hindsight.(8') if cause has special action towards effect, all things have some action, so we cannot classify the relation-ship.InTSP also, we can see the same claim.In addition to these choices, haribhadra shows the following possibility.(9)Haribhadra says "aggregate cannot become a cause" but he does not analyze thiscase in detail.(1 if we think cause gives mental impression (samskara) to effect,Haribhadra establishes whether the alternative vasaka is the same thing as mentalimpression or not. haribhadra denies each case.Inconclusion haribhadra showes conflicts between causality and momentarinessin the viewpoint of lcausality A] and [causality b].〓.Comparison between Avp and SvSAfter discussing materialism, kalavadin and God, in SvS chapter 4 and5,Haribhadra mentions momentariness and causality. inVp and svS, he sometimesuses the same method to criticize the buddhists' thought. I picked up the point dis-cusses only in SvS. haribhadra discusses [causality A] and [causality b also irSvs. he states that "there is no recollection.242), recognition, and cessation ofinterest to obiect (v.243) if we accept momentarily. Moreover, it is impossible tohave fear of it, act on it, and obtain it. A person cannot accept the effect of the ac-tion which he made (v.244). Even if one practices religious precepts, its effects wildisappear at the moment. one cannot get liberation from samsara".A claim that effect arises immediately after cause in vp case7 is denied inSvs v.293also. claim that aggregate is cause which is discussed in Avp case9,isdenied in SVS v.306also. According to SvS, haribhadra uses the method that manythings cannot produce one thing. he discusses this problem generally in vp. Thestatement that cause gives mental impression to effect is discussed in AVp case 10and Svs vv.326-328.The viewpoint which is not discussed inVP but in Svs, is analyzing momen-tariness changing from existing to non-existing (vv.248-275)and from non-existingto existing (vv.276-302). dharmakirti thinks that changing from existing to non-ex-isting ie. vanishing is that there is not any thing left (na bhavati). on the contraryHaribhadra thinks that there is "nothing". Even if every thing has vanished, there is
"nothing". so, this idea conflicts with momentariness.Even if we think that non-existing changes to existence, we cannot add ability(sakti) to a non-existing thing. we cannot acknowledge this change.In another case, buddha had committed a sin of killing another person in forme!life91kalpa ago, so buddha is hurt in his foot in the present world (v.361). to es-tablish this logic, we have to acknowledge the self which continues from the formellife to the present world. There is conflict between this logic and buddhist's mo-mentarlness.
3. ConclusionIcompared haribhadra's avp and Svs regarding non-momentariness in Jainisnand momentariness in buddhism. Haribhadra uses the same logic in each text. butin SvS he uses some new logic from the viewpoint of transition from existence tonon-existence and vice versa. he points out in SvS that stories of the buddha's for-mer life conflicted with momentariness. i also compared haribhadra's views withsome buddhist texts, MMK, TSP, etc., and found that the same logics are used inthese texts. too.Anekantajayapataka,byharibhadra Suri wiith his owcommentary and Muni-candra Siriis super commentry, gS No.88/No.105,baroda,19401947./panekantavadapravesa,by haribhadra suri, satippanakah, Patan, 1919.〓k〓ulamadhyamakakarika, Madhyamakavrtti : Mulamadhyamakakarikas (Madhy-amikasutras) de Nagarijuna avec la Prasannapada commentaire de candrakirti,publiee par Louis de la vallee Poussin, bibliotheca buddhica 4, st. petersbourg .1913.
Svssastravarttasamuccaya(a) acarya haribhadra Suri's sastravarttasamuccaya with hindi translation,Notes and introduction, translated by k. k. Dixit, l. d. Series128(22),ahmed-abad.2002.
(b) sastravarttasamuccaya by i haribhadra suri with his ow commentarynamed dikprada, Godiji jain upashraya, bombay, 1929.Ptattvasamgrahapanjika, by kamalasila, ed. by e. krishnamacharya, Gos30/31,Baroda. 192
Harada. Yasunori006Moksa in jainism-with special reference to haribhadra Suri
-,journal of indian ad buddhist Studies(Indogaku bukkyogakukenkyu),54-3,1126-1132.Uno, tomoyuki2003
the kalavadin as seen by Haribhadra suri(「ジャイナ教文献に現れるkalavadin]), Journal of indian and buddhist Suudies (indogaku buk-kyogaku kenkyu),51-2,58-621)svs contains about700verses and Haribhadra wrote an own commentary (dikprada).Though modern scholars did not pay attention to this text except for uno[2003] discussing the kalavadin in Jainism, it is very important to study this text. because there arecommon verses to ajp,avp, saddarsanasamuccaya, Dharmakirtis pramanavartika,Samantabhadra's aptamimamsa.2)haribhadra refers to santaraksitais name in his commentary of svs v.296.This is ahelpful information to decide Haribhadra's date.3)though the chapter20 of MMk is named as samagripariksa, various cases of causal-ity are discussed in reality.4)See harada [2006].5)see Avp p.51,119-24.)see avVpp.53,1.10-p.54,1.2.7)these points are discussed also in TSP. but different points, ie. decision after doublooking for a thing which someone put down etc, are shown there( TSp ad v476)more-over. Ratnakirti in Sthirasiddhidisana added some other points.8)see avp p.55,1l.14-19.(key words) haribhadra suri, anekantavadapravesa, sastravarttasamuccaya, causality〔Research Fellow, kyushu university, ph.d.)
