on the Seventh Abode in kukai's〓eabodes of ind of the mysterious MandalSania juRkovic"The mind realizing non-origination of the mind"(覚心不生住心)is the nameof the seventh abode in kukai's model of the ten abodes of mind, which is related tothe teachings of the chinese Sanlun(三論)tradition. The name of this abode isbased on the concept appearing in the first chapter of the Mahavairocanasutra, inthe passage which describes the yogic practice of the second kalpa.l) In relation toPutixi lutreatise on bodhicitta,菩提心論),which is the other primary source for theestablishment of the model of ten stages,2) the seventh stage in the kukai's modelcorresponds to that aspect of Mahayana practice which emphasizes the realizationof emptiness of all phenomena(一切法空).3)beginning with the seventh stage, kukaidirects the attention of the practitioner towards the mind itself, initiating the processof the realization of non-origination of the mind(心不生).stages seven and eight re-veal the process of the realization of emptiness until its complete transcendence atthe ninth stage.1.
Kukai presents the teaching of the Sanlun tradition, almost exclusively on the ba.sis of jizang's(吉蔵)writings on the topic of the two truths(諦)and the eightfoldlegation(八不),in 〓u yi(the profound Meaning of the Three Treatises,(三論玄義)and da cheng xuthe profound Meaning of Mahayana,(大乗玄論).the purpostof the eightfold negation at the seventh abode is to cut off all "mental manifoldness"(prapanca,戯論)and bring the practitioner to a tranquil state of mind, wherein he re-alizes the non-origination of the mind. however, it seems that kukai considers theSanlun realization of emptiness as remaining on a rather theoretical level. In thetext of the eighth stage he states, that "bodhisattvas of the previous eon [the sixthand the seventh abode] still engage in mental manifoldness."4) Moreover, he regardsthe eighth abode as the place of mind which is "unconditioned and without charac-
〓n the Seventh abode in kukai's〓eAbodes of ind of the Mysterious Mandls. juRkovic)2teristics," and it "explains nonduality as neither existent nor nonexistent."5)Inthtext of the seventh abode, kukai extensively quotes jizang's writings on the incor-rect understanding of the middle way(中道)on the basis of the concept of twotruths.6) The theory of the two truths was a subject of many debates among chineseBuddhist scholars, especially in the fifth and the sixth century, and was a conve.nient tool to use in order to point out the false understanding of other traditions.Sanlun is especially known for the concept of "destroying the false and revealingthe correct"(破邪顕正),which was developed by jizang. kukai does not use thisconcept in relation to the Sanlun teaching in the seventh abode, but he refers to pas-sages in which jizang refutes the wrong understanding of the pi tang, cheng se.and She lun(攝論)traditions, and generally the other teachers (of the Liang dynasty)in relation to the two truths. Due to the tendency of earlier Sanlun scholars7) to relate the concepts of "emptiness" and "provisionality" with "non-being"(無)and "being"()respectively, and to posit them as two ontological realities, Tiantai mastelZhiyi(智〓)emphasized the concept of the three truths(三諦)and the meditation o"three insights in the single thought"(一心三観),in order to provide a more profound insight into the meaning of the middle way. although kukai fully acknowl-edged the importance of the concept of two truths, he may have had a slightly negativistic view towards the practical results of the Sanlun way of practice andmeditation, in terms of the realization of the middle way. The Tiantai concept of thethree truths might have seemed to kukai to be practically more conducive to the re.alization of the true meaning of the middle way. i ni gi (Meanings of the syllableHum,昨字義),he concisely states that the "three truths interpenetrate perfectly(三諦圓渉)"8)Furthermore, in the text of the eighth abode, he emphasizes the Tiantamethod of "calming and contemplation"(観道)and refers specifically to the medi-tation of "three insights in the single thought," which brings insight into emptiness,dependent origination, and the middle way.9)2
The concept of buddha-nature must have been extremely important for kukai asthe whole Shingon practice is based on the idea of the original identity of sentientbeings and buddha. The depth of insight into the meaning of the original buddha-nature of mind may be one of the criteria for positioning the different teachings at
On the Seventh abode in kukai's〓Abodes of ind of the Mysterious 〓andla (s. juRkovic)their respective places, when considering the progressive aspect of the ten abodesn expounding the meaning of the sixth abode, related to the Faxiang(法相)teach-ing, kukai emphasized the development of bodhicitta in a relative sense (samrtikabodhiciitia,世俗菩提心).In relation to the realization of buddha-nature, in i gi hecriticizes the Faxiang view stating: "To teach that this possesses it, while that doesnot, is nothing more than a provisional doctrine."10)Considering the seventh abode.it is known that jizang wrote a lot on the meaning of Buddha-nature.ll) it is conside-red that it was the influence of jizang that later Sanlun scholars held the view that"grasses and trees have a buddha-nature."12) however, kukai did not seem to find itsignificant to emphasize insight into buddha-nature at the seventh stage. on thecontrary, in Unji gi he states that "rejecting existence and establishing non-exis-tence, is diminution and decrease," which "cuts constantly the buddha-nature, al-though the original buddha is without diminution and without decrease."13) withinthe tenfold model of abodes, realization of Buddha-nature happens at the eighthabode of "the mind of the unconditioned one way"(一道無為心),which is related tothe Tiantai(天台)tradition. kukai characterizes the eighth abode with the realiza-tion of the principle of original purity(本来清浄理).14)On the basis of the practice of"calming and contemplation," the practitioner of the eighth abode attains suram-gamasamadhi(首楞嚴三味),which is another name for buddha-nature. Zhiyi seemsto be unsatisified with the Madhyamika approach as being "devoid of functions(無功用)."15)The state of activity, transcending the state of stagnation in emptiness, isalso an important factor for kukai in the establishment of the ninth stage.16)Fromthe same perspective, it can be concluded that kukai considered tiantai insight intoemptiness, as it relates to the realization of buddha-nature, as more profound tharthe Sanlun approach.3.
The esoteric approach to the seventh abode is related to the "samadhi of greatemptiness"(大空三味)of bodhisattva Manjusri, who embodies both exoteric and eso-teric aspects of the teaching on emptiness. on the basis of the 〓ahavairocana-sutra, kukai presents his mantra: "he he kumaraka vimuktipathasthita smara smarapratijnana."17)The meaning of this mantra is calling for the prince who is abiding inthe way of liberation to recall the vows taken in his previous existences. The esote-
On the Seventh abode in kukai's〓eAbodes of ind of the Mysterious 〓nd(S. juRkovic)(131ric interpretation of this mantra is condensed in the syllable "ma," which meanemptiness. Manjusri's esoteric aspect is the " Tathagata of no mental manifoldness"(無戯論如来).In esoteric teaching, he teaches the "wheel of revolving syllables,which is the samadhi of the five letters(五字輪)"a ra p ca na."18)4. conclusionThe seventh stage has the function of initiating the process of the development ofbodhicitta at the ultimate level (paramarthikabodhicitia,勝義菩提心),which is subse-quently deepened at the eighth and ninth stages. compared to the later stages, theSanlun teaching is still engaged in "mental manifoldness," and the discriminatiorbetween subject and object is not yet transcended. kukai's preference for the tiantaiteaching, instead of the Sanlun, is due to the Tiantai's emphasis on the realization ofBuddha-nature, which may be interpreted as a positive aspect of emptiness. it maybe stated that, in the context of the ten abodes, kukai ignored the aspect of Sanlunteaching related to the development of jizang's theory on Buddha-nature. howeveihis intention may not have been to present the Sanlun tradition's teaching from itsown doctrinal standpoint, kukai emphasized those aspects of Sanlun teachingwhich are conducive to the progress of a mantra practitioner, based on the〓ahavairocanasutra and putixi lun. his approach to the Sanlun tradition is fromthe perspective of the shingon abode, which considers the main historical ahayanateachings to be different entrances (dharmaparyaya9)to the same teaching, represented by the samadhis of four bodhisattvas of the central eight-petalled lotus divi-sion of the Garbha mandala.1)The original text refers to the Mahayana practice only. Taisho shinshu dizokyo(ab-reviated as T.)18,p.3b9-14.kukai interpreted this passage as two stages and relatesthem to the sixth and the seventh abode in his Tenabodes of ind of the Mysterious〓andala(秘密曼茶羅十住心論)and precious key to the Mysterious treasury(秘蔵宝鑰),『定本弘法大師全集』2,3 (abbreviated as T.Z.),高野山1993.2)Putixi lun is especially important for the establishment of the model often progressivestages inprecious key lo the Mysterious treasury.3)t.32,p.573b.10-144)t.Z.3,p.169.5)ibid
)InSnu xn yi, jizang refutes the wrong views of non-buddhists, Pi tang(毘曇)〓

on the Seventh abode in kukai's〓abodes of ind of the wysterious Manda (s. juRkovic)Cheng se(成実)traditions, and the false understanding of Mahayanists. t.45,pp.l-14izang was particulary vigorous in refuting views of cheng Se scholars. Paul L. Swan-son: t'ien-t'ai philosophy, Asan Humanities press, 1989,pp.82ff.7)see whalen w. Lai: sinitic understanding of two truths in the liang dynasty (50-557),philosophy east and west, vol.28,no.3,university press of Hawaii,19788)T.Z.3,p.63.9)t.Z.2,p.26710)t.z.3,p.63. this criticism refers to Faxiang's classification of people into five groupsaccording to their different, inherent predispositions towards the attainment of enlighten-ment(五性)
11)on jizang's theory of the middle way as a direct cause of buddha-nature(中道仏性)and refutation of other different theories on the direct cause of buddha-nature presentat his time, see t.45,pp.35b-37a. Also, see Ming-wood liu: The Yogacara and Madhy-mika interpretation of the buddha-nature concept in chinese buddhism, philosophy〓ast and west, vol.35,no.2,pp.177ff,198The early development of the buddha-nature doctrine in China, journal of chinese philosophy, vol. 16,1989.12)平井俊栄:『中国般若思想史研究』春秋社1973.p.634.13)t.Z.3,p.63.14)t.z.3,p.271.15)NGyu-kwani tien-fai buddhism and eary adhyamika, University of Hawaipress, 1993,pp.58ff.16)See jurkovic sania: on the ninth Stage in kukai's Ten Abodes of the Mind of theMysterious Mandala-relation to the "Mind which transcends No Self-nature",lournal of indiad buddhist studies, vol.53,no.2, March200.17)t.Z.2,p.157.18)on the meaning of the mantra, see酒井紫郎:「文殊菩薩の五字咒法に就いて」『密教文化』18,1952.
19)生井智紹「曼茶羅と多様不二の理論].『曼茶羅の諸相』,法蔵館,2005.(Key words)覚心不生心,大空三味,十住心論,三論〔Researcher, koyasan university Research institute for Esoteric buddhist culture)
