Continued Study of An Shigao's worksThe terminology of the Mayi jing t732and the Fagun jing t611HunG hung-lungIntroduction
The following paper discusses two texts in the Taisyuozou(大正藏),the 〓ayjing(罵意經),which was translated by An Shigao(安世高),and the Fagun jling(法觀經),which was translated by Zhu fahu(竺法護).the sutras records, which claimtheir translators to be as aforementioned, both originated from the lidai sanbao ii(歴代三寶紀)1),however, as it is well known, the records of the Lidai sanbao ii areunreliable. in addition, according to the Shiyi zajing lu(失譯雜經録)of theChusanzang jii(出三藏記集T2145)the translators of both texts are in fact anony-mous2). Therefore, in this paper, I would like to present an analysis of the texts' ter-minology that brings forth substantial evidence to verify the actual authors. thenewly found Shiermen jing and Jlie shiermen jing3)which are both An Shigao'sworks, are very useful resources for the analysis and verification presented in thefollowing.
Classification of Sutras' contentAccording to the research of the Japanese scholar hayashiya Tomoiiro(林屋友次郎),it seems that the author of the mayi jing is An Shigao.4) Yet, Prof. Tomojiro onlymentioned this point, he did not offer substantial evidence to support this assertion.However, interestingly i have found several paragraphs within the mayijing that arejrikingly similar to the content of the Fagun jing, all containing terminology ofthe distinct style of an Shigao.The following chart is a classification of the two texts' content. For the sake ofconvenience in making a comparison, the Fagunjing can be divided into two partsconsisting of five paragraphs, and the Mayi jing can be divided into three parts con-
sisting of seven paragraphs.The symbolrepresents the paragraphs that are almost identical, whereas theymbol〓represents the paragraphs which have completely different content.〓ayi jing
Fagun jing〓ayi jingPartl
Part lpartl
Paragraphl p.530a26～533bl5paragraphl p.240b28～241a9Part2
Part2
Paragraph2 p.533bl5～533c6Paragraph p.24lal0～24lblParagraph3 p.24lb2～24lb20paragraph4p.24b21～242allParagraph5p.242al2～242a20Paragraph7 p.534c2～534c20Paragraph4p.533cl5～534b5Paragraph6 p.534b24～534c2Part 3
Paragraph3 p.533c7～533cl5Non-existent
Paragraph5p.534b6～534b23Non-existent
Part l
The content of Paragraphl in the Fagun jing is quite different from that ofParagraphl in the mayi jing, also, the latter is longer than the former. for this rea-son, we have classified both texts' Paragraphl as Part l, respectively.Part2
within the two texts, we can find the following pairs paragraph have nearly iden-tical content : paragraph 2of the fagun jing and Paragraph 3 of the Mayi ing;Paragraph 3 of the Fagun jing and Paragraph7 of the Mayi jing, paragraph 4 ofthe Fagun jing and Paragraph4 of the Mayi jing, paragraph5of the Faguan jingand Paragraph 6 of the mayi jing. Thereby, this analysis subdivides these four pairsof paragraphs as being contained in part 2of both texts, respectively. because ofthe existence of several differing words in part 2of both texts, we cannot distin-guish which text is the more original. however, we can say that both texts definitelycome from the same source.
Part3
The two paragraphs 3 and 5 of the mayi ing, classified here as Part 3, do not ex-ist in the Fagun jing.Analysis of the terminology in part2we can find at least llkinds of terms or sentences that exist not only in both theFaguan jing and the mayi jing, but also in several other works of An Shigao. thoseterms or sentences are seldom seen in other authors' (or translators') worksTherefore it is very distinct that the usage of those terms or sentences especially be-longs to An Shigao's style.1)yiwei renzhong意爲人種5).This term also exists in the anan shouyi jing(安般守意經)6).2)zhongzai種栽:this term also exists in the anban shouyi jing7 andthe Mingdu wushi jiaoi jing(明度五十校計經)8)and the ahn koujie shieryinyuaning(阿含口解十因縁經)9).3) niandai念待10).Here, the meaning of nian念isiawareness' (vitarka), and the meaning of dai待is 'pondering' (vicara)1) both wordsare acts of intellectualization, later called jueguan覺觀or xunsi尋伺.this term alsoexists in the shiermen ig(+門經)12)and jie shiermen jing(解十門經)13).and wefind the term待念,which has the same meaning, appearing in the anban shouyijingl4)and the lie shiermen jing15)4) iyutan nian feichang bai意欲貪念非常敗16)There is a very similar term tn dangnian feichang bai貪當念非常敗which appears in Anban shouyi jing17).5yn dangnian dui〓當念對18).the more completesentence yin dangnian ui suoyou ehu姓當念對所有惡露appears in Anan shouyi〓ingl9). the similar sentence tanyinyigi dangguanshen suoyou elu貪淫意起當觀身所有惡露appears in ie shiermen jing20)6)chenhui nian dengxin腺志念等心21).The sentence with the same meaning nian sidengxin shi wei zhi chenhui yao念四等心是爲止瞋恚藥appears in Anan shouyi jing22, and the sentence chenhuiyi qidanghu dengxin瞋恚意起當護等心appears in ie shiermen jing237)yuchi nianbenyiqiexing feichang愚癡念本一切行非常24).this sentence appears in Fagniing, and the similar sentence yuchi nian benxing buchang愚癡念本行不常appearsin the Mayi jing25.The sentence with the same meaning zii benheyinyuanyou shiweizhi yuchi yao自計本何因縁有是爲止愚癡藥appears in the anban shouyi jing2,and yuchiyi qi dangnian benmo愚癡意起當念本末appears in the jie shiermet
jing27).8)duan shen shishi斷身十事28).the same term also appears in the aha,koujie shieryinyuan jing299)zuo shishi cheng wuyin作十事成五陰30).The similar term shi shishi hewei wuyin是十事合爲五陰appears in the ahan koujie shiery-inyun jing311)jingy xingdao juezhe dechu經言行道覺者得出32).The simi-lar sentence jingy congdao de tuo經言從道得〓appears in the anban shouyi〓ing3311)bufiu xiang不復向34).the same term also appears in the anban shouyijing35)and the ahbitan wufaxing jing(阿毘曇五法行經)36).from the above evidenceof the terminology analysis, we can decidedly say that Part 2 of both texts was ren-dered by a Shigao.Analysis of the terminology in part3The content of Part 3 only appears in the Mayi jing. The following analysis ofone sentence and two terms from withinpart 3 shows, undoubtedlv, that it is a rendering in the style of an Shigao.1)shouzhi bianguan gu. jingy zhigun juxing. weide sidi.守止便觀故。經言止鬱倶行・爲得四諦37):The similar sentence zhiguanju suixing.. ling weizuo sishi止觀倶隨行令爲作四事appears in yinchiru jing(陰持入經)38).According to thisphrase's content, the term sishi四事refers to same meaning as sidi四諦.In anoth-er sentence with a similar meaning eyi zhi biande guangu.. weide sidi惡已止便得觀故…爲得四諦appears in Anan shouyi jing39,even though it lacks the term zhi-gun juxing止觀倶行.other than an Shigao, translators in early ChineseBuddhism seldom utilized the term zhiguan juxing.2)yi 〓inzou意便走40).Thisterm also appears in the anban shouyi jing41)bu zhuan yi不轉意42).This termalso appears in the Anban shouyi jing43)and the jie shiermen jing44)Analysis of the terminology in part l of the fagun jingIn the following, we will examine seven terms or sentences in part l of the Faguajing and analyze their usage, which is characteristic of An Shigao's style.1)dang lijie shenyi chi. chizhe weiyiqie wusuofan.當立戒身意持・持者爲一切無所犯45)The similar sentence shenchi qiie yichi sn jie. Shiwei shenyi chi ye.身持七戒意持三戒。是爲身意持也appears in the anan shouyi jing46)2)andaofa xing-do貪道法行道47).The same term appears in the anan shouyi jing48))zuoxing
dao坐行道49).The same term exists in the anban shouyi jing50)and the Mayi ing5)4)shangye houye上夜後夜52).this word appears in the pufayi jing(普法義經)53),and the qichu sangun jing(七處三觀經)54).This term was translated as chuyhouye初夜後夜at a later time.5)chuxi ruxinian mieshi出息入息念滅時55)Thisterm also exists in the anan shouyi jing5).6)ke zi guanshen. yike guan tarensh-en.. youshi buke zi guanshen. yi buke guan tarenshen.可自觀身・亦可觀他人身。.有時不可自觀身。亦不可觀他人身57)。we can find the similar sentences voushi kezi guanshen. yike gun tarenshen.. youshi buke zi guanshen. yi buke guan tarensh-en有時可自觀身・亦可觀他人身。有時不可自觀身。亦不可觀他人身appearing inthe anban shouyi jing58).7)jianfei dangnian fengzhang. jian bainian sirengu. jian-ni meinian siren yuhuaishi se zhu qinghei. jian chisu nian xie.見肥當念逢脹。見白念死人骨。見賦眉念死人欲壤時色轉青黒。見赤絮念血59)。The similar sentences見肥當念死人脹。見白當念死人骨。見眉黒當念死人正黒・見朱脣當念血正赤arecontained in the anban shouyi jing60)And the sentences意愛女人身白好當念死人骨正白・意愛女人肌肉好當念人死壤時身裕痕・意愛女人脣赤好當念死人壤時匹正赤・意愛女人眉黒好當念死人壤時正青黒appears in the jie shiermen jing61)Analysis of the terminology inpartl of the mayi iing〓iu bolomi六波羅蜜:the termliu bolomi appears in part l of the Mayi iing62)and it is a very important concept of Mahayana buddhism. Although kang Senghuiused the similar term liudu六度inliudui jing63),neither an Shigao nor his disci-ples had. So it is possible that Part l of the mayi jing is a composite of text by aShigao and another author. in agreement with hayashiya tomojiro's assertion, the〓ayi jing seems to be a work of an shigao, but we can not declare this with cer.tainty.
Summary of the terminological analysis of the fagun jiingIn the analysis of the 19 terms or sentences cited from the Fagun jing, it is ap-parent that they all correspond to a Shigao's style of oral rendering. The follow-ing list tallies the number of these terms or sentences that appearin other works byhim.
Anban shouyi jinganban shouyi jing15jie shiermen jing6
Ahan koujie shieryinyuan jingAhbitan wufaxing jing2円Mingdu wushi jiaoii jing1pufayi jingpufayi jing円
qichu sanguan jing1shiermen jing円In addition, from the above list, we can find the number of terms appearing inthe anban shouyi jing is the most out of all other an shigao's works. Moreover, thebeginning paragraph of the Fagun Jing64)diyi heyigu shuxi.. yidexing weidiy-ichan第一何以故數息…以得行爲第一禪is closely connected in meaning to a partof the anban shouyi jing and originally should be placed before the sentence shusiviwei sueidierchan數息以爲隨第二禪65).Conclusion
lt is likely that the mayi ling is An shigao's work, since apart from the termubolomi, most of the terminology is characteristic of his style. Regarding the Faguarjing, contrary to the previous assumption, it was not translated by Zhu Fahu, butrather is an oral rendering by An shigao, as can be can be clearly determined by theanalysis of the terminology. Moreover, the beginning paragraph of the Fagum iingdiyi heyigu shuxi yidexing weidiyichan contains partial content of the originatranslation of the anban shouyi jing, which is also a work of an Shigao.Because of limited space, the footnotes are deleted)<Key word> an Shigao, Mayi jing, Faguan jing, Anban shouyi jingAssistant Professor, Asia university, Taiwan)
