Robes of Rags (funzoe) and Silk in the Edo Period:MenzaZuiho and ueda Shohen interpret the practice of the buddhist RobeDiane RIGGS
I. Introduction:during the Edo period, interest in reviving the precepts spread throughout the maio.sects of buddhism. Those monks with strong commitment to the movement wouldpledge themselves in private ceremonies (jiseijikai自誓持戒)to uphold the full twchundred and fifty buddhist precepts (gusoku kai具足戒).based on the interpreta-tion of the precepts of the Shibunritsu四分律)promoted by the chinese vinayaMaster, daoxua jpn dosen道宣596-667), they also practiced wearing linen andcotton robes exclusively, avoiding silk robes, the normal garb for the time. Theychose muted colors and soon came to be recognized by the dull color and wrinkledappearance of their robes, even causing them to be accepted as a separate interestgroup by the Edo bakufu (nishimura Ryo 2003). Such robes also fit in with a long-standing practice in Japanese buddhism of associating black or dull colored robeswith recluses and ascetics (osumi1965)These reformers presented themselves as returning to a more pure buddhist prac-tice, but in Indian buddhist literature, it is the rag robe (funzoe糞掃衣Skt: pamsukula)that is traditionally associated with ascetic practice. ideally this includes picking updiscarded cloth, washing and dyeing the pieces to a uniform color and sewing theminto robes. The ten types of cloth suitable for rag robes are defined in theShibunritsu by the use to which the cloth was put before it was cast away. These tentypes of cloth have been:1. chewed by cows; 2. chewed by rodents, 3. burnt, 4. used for menstruation,5. used inchildbirth;6. carried away from the shrine by birds, animals or the wind, 7. taken froma graveyard;8. used for petitionary rites to the gods, 9. discarded when receiving employ-
ment from the king, 10. used to wrap a corpse (T22.〓1428,850a).although edo period buddhists knew about the rag robe, the practice was not aswidespread as the use of linen and cotton robes. why did Edo monks in the pre-cepts movement emphasize rejecting silk instead of moving to adopt the practice ofthe rag robe? In this paper i examine how two authors during this period describedthese two types of religious practice.〓. The practice of the Rag robe as described by Menza ZuihcThe teachings of the buddhai's dharma robe『釈氏法衣訓』,written in1768bthe Soto zen scholar-monk, Menza Zuiho(面山瑞方1683-1769) uses a wide selec-tion of citations to advocate the living practice of wearing the robe. Menzan ex-plains that he was motivated to write the piece because contemporary forms andpractices were concerned only with the robe as decoration of the body and henceviolated what he considered to be the first principle of the buddhist robe: to achievethe solemnity of the dharma body. Menzan relies on two essays, kesa kudoku(袈裟功徳)and den'e(伝衣),written in 1241by dogen200-1253),founder of the sotozen school. in these essays Dogen praised the rag robe as most worthy of reverence.whereas the writings of his contemporaries typically mention the rag robe onlybriefly, Menzan cites fifteen different sources, including four citations from theShibunritsu, jjujuritsu and uburitsu vinaya and commentaries; three from Chinesetreatises; and five from scriptures. Menzan clearly saw the rag robe as key to under-standing the meaning of the buddha's robe.In discussing the practice of the rag robe, Menzan cites the Maharatnakuta jpdaiho shakukyo大宝積経)three times. In the first instance, he merely commentsbriefly that the contemplations on the merit of the buddha's relics described in thisscripture apply equally to the rag robe. he also cites the six contemplations of pick-ing up rags for making robes which occur in three stages of development. First, thetwo contemplations of the knowledge of what is necessary for nurturing the goodgive rise, second, to the two contemplations of lack of pride and a determination toaccumulate good qualities. Third, this mental state in turn promotes thoughts of notadorning the body and commanding a pure heart. Menzan emphasizes that the ragrobe by its nature leads one towards the buddha's teaching, and that is the source of
ts merit. his final citation describes the rag robe practice of an ideal postulant (sha-mi沙彌skt: sramanera):Buddha said to Mahakasyapa, look at postulant Shuna (Skt: cunda) who picked up something from the midst of impure smelly and filthy rags, ate little, and when finished eatingwent to the great pool of Anoku. he was about to wash them when the heavenly beingswho lived around the edge of the pond came from far away to greet him. They bowedtheir heads down to him in reverence and all rejoiced in purity. They took the impurtrags (funzo) which Shuna had picked up and washed them so that the impurity entirelydisappeared. They then took the washing water to wash their own bodies. All the heavenlybeings knew that Shuna could maintain the pure precepts and cnter every concentrationof meditation and had great virtue, so for this reason they came out to welcome him asnoble person and paid obeisance to him(t.ll〓310,647.1).By citing the Maharatnakuta frequently in this section Menzan emphasizes the connection between the rag robe and Mahakasyapa, a figure strongly associated withthe ascetic practices, including the rag robe.iebuddhism, Mahakasyapa is be-ieved to have directly received the transmission of the teaching from Sakyamuniand to have been entrusted with a robe for the future buddha, Maitreya (Silk,2003).Menzan suggests how the practice of the rag robe could be incorporated into a lifeof contemplation and worship practices and that it is the proper attire for the simpleasceticism portrayed by the postulant Shuna. but Menzan is not simply citing scrip-ural passages as an ideal of the past. a patchwork robe stored at Eifuku-an inObama, Fukui-ken believed to have been made and worn by Menzan suggests thathe recreated the physical practice of the rag robe as well. This worn and much)atched garment is clearly not simply a demonstration project, but rather has seeryears of use.〓. The practice of the non-sillk robe as described by ueda ShoherAccording to the vinaya, materials for the funzoe are discarded cloth and thereforeindirectly received from the laity, but vinaya literature also establishes rules of di-rect donation from the laity who received merit in return. These "ten kinds ofrobes" in the shibunritsu refer to the types of fiber used in making the cloth, name-ly: linen(3types), silk (2types), wool(2types), cotton, feathers and fabric made from
wood (t22.〓1428,602.1)although each of the five vinaya specify that silk is suit-ble for robes, daoxuan argued that since silk production involves killing silkworms, accepting it hinders the practice of compassion. although not a violation ofthese rules, daoxuan ruled that silk was inappropriate for Mahayana monks. Theprohibition referred only to cloth directly donated from the laity, not to rag robes.A rejection of silk would therefore have an impact on the relationship between themonks and the laity.The arguments for and against the use of silk in robes came under intense scrutinyby Edo period scholar-monks who promoted a return to the vinaya. These argu-ments are reviewed and discussed by a Shingon risshu scholar-monk, ueda Shohen(上田正遍1828-1908)in his treatise on the Proper practice of daoxuanis prohibitionof lk robes『南山律宗袈裟禁絹順正論』(Shohen 1880). Shohen's work is signifi-cant because he discusses the textual evidence for the abstract moral principle of theanti-silk position from the practical viewpoint of one who has incorporated this po-sitionin his own religious practice.one of the issues raised in the treatise is whether or not one may receive silk fo1robes second hand. In this case, one is remote from the action of killing as the clotlhas already passed through many hands. As the object was not ordered by themonk, but was received already made up into the garment, one cannot say that themonk is guilty of having intended the killing of the silkworms to make the cloth.As Yiling (jpn gijo義淨635-713) comments, "if one discusses killing, first there isthe intention of cutting off a life; this is how karmic action is completed. if it is nointentional at all then it is not a sin. Three conditions must be met: intention, actionnd the result. if these three aspects are in accord with the monastic rules (ie. theyare pure), then there is no fault." (t54.#2125,212.3).In response to this Shohen ar-gues that if one uses silk, one contributes to the total economy of silk production:Those who deeply value compassion, how can they covet and wear the silk that causesmore and more harm to life? if one wears it then one desires it and this crushes one'scompassion and increases one's bad karma. ifI wear silk then someone will increasinglyharm living beings by making sillk. if i do not wear it then that killing will end. That sin
and merit starts with me. (Shohen305.2)Shohen argues that one must see one's own responsibility for the entire sequence ofactions involved in making the cloth. Even if the silk is secondhand, using it en-courages silk production as a whole. Shohen emphasizes this idea of a global re-sponsibility at the end of the treatise where he cites the shijiki「四分律行事鈔資持記」,a commentary on daoxuan's work by Yuanzhao (jpn ganjo元照1048-1116).Inthe passage he suggests that the mental world of the bodhisattva is substantially dif-ferent because he is able to imagine the whole chain of relationships that lie behindthe presence of the object: "A bodhisattva imagines that which comes from afarEven if one is removed from the act of killing, one is not without the action of kill-ing. stepping with the foot or wearing things on the body, one is saturated with karma." (Shohen309.2)As these examples show, one aspect of this practice is contemplative. Instead oftracking one's own mental, physical and verbal actions to ensure that they are in a-cord with the monastic rules, one enters a contemplation of all possible connectionsbeyond the perameter of one's own intentions and actions. This practice of avoiding〓ilk robes, however, raises other ethical problems. how does the monk who avoidusing silk deal with a donor who comes bearing a gift made of silk?Shohen explains various solutions to this problem. Yiing, who accepted the use ofsilk explained, "if a donor brings an offering with a pure mind then recite a bene-diction, and accept it, saying, "'(This gift) sustains me and nurtures your virtue.: Trulythis is no error." (t.54中2125,212.3)but Shohen feels that Yiling's solution is insufficient:
if there is a donor who brings (silk),then you must explain it to him right away so that herealizes the import of the teaching. if you do so, then he must exchange it for cloth such ascotton and donate it. or, one can enquire about the donor's intention, receive it and useifor garments other than robes (kesa), then it is not a violation (Shohen306.1).That is, the monk guards the purity of his practice by teaching the laity to bring a
more appropriate donation. Shohen cites another solution that Daoxuan proposed"Reading the vinaya, I saw that if one receives a mat (gagu) already made of silk,one should shred it and, mixing it up with hard soil, daub it (on the wall). by thismeans i doubled my reverence for the rules of the vinaya (T45.〓1898,879.3.18-19)."By accepting the silk but later destroying it, the monk follows the rule for acceptingdonations, but satisfies daoxuan's rule by destroying the inappropriate gift.Iv. Conclusion:both Menzan and Shohen describe these two types of robes in terms of contempla-lions. For Menzan, the rag robe promotes a contemplation of frugality and theneaning of the impure becoming pure through ascetic practice. For Shohen, thecontemplation considers the chain of relationships that lead back to the act of killingsilk worms, and is ruthless in excising the impurity of even a strand of silk. onesenses in both authors a longing for a past era in which the robe was properly re-spected and understood, and a dedication to the idea of the robe as a sacred gar-ment. while both are grappling with the dissonance between their ideal and the re-ality of contemporary Edo period buddhist practices, they are equally determinedto manifest this idealin their daily practice. Their ideas are shaped by reading texts,however, rather than by traditionally transmitted teachings. In this sense, they areboth involved in the reconstruction of the physical robe and its religious practicesthrough texts.Bibliography
MenzZuiho. 1768."Shakushi hoe kun."ai Nihon bukkyo zensho, v.73,207-219.Nishimura ryo.2003."kaiko no koe: kinsei ritsuzo ni okeru kene kinshi ni tsuite." inNihon bukkyo so kenkyuOsumi kazuo. 1965."tonsei ni tsuite." inokkaido daigaku bungaku bu kiyo.Ueda Shohen. 1880."nanzan risshu kesa kinken junsho ron." n*ai nihonbukkyo zensho*, v.74,304-310.(The research for this paper was supported by the Numata fellowship administrated byRyukoku university)<Key words) kasaya, pamsukula,禁絹,上田照遍,面山瑞方(visiting Researcher, Ryukoku university)
