The Symbolism of Hokke-proper (i.A biocentric drama upon the stage in the Middle-heavenKoTANi Yukio
These are the unknown accomplishments (from the years ca 1933-19631)) of aJapanese private scholar, hanjiro tominaga(富永半次郎2),(1883-1965),who tried, onthe basis of his own practical exercise of sakyamuni's teachings and of his own ve.rification of sanskrit and pali texts, to sift out what were thought to be original partsof Hokke (lotus sutra) from the annexed complete set of recurrent prajna thoughts. itconsists of only 6chapters: introduction, Skilful Access, Contemplation of a stupa.Gushing out of 60.000bodhisattvas, Measuring of Merits of Tathagata andEntrusting of Saddharma.The following is a paraphrased explanation of the sutra's title3)[Saddamma (of a man's buddha-like judgement)] sat) (true being) appears indeed〓n an individual as objective existence, the original essence of a (dhamma> is strictlsubjective because of its being judgement.[Pundarika (in the mental process)] what has been traditionally called <mind) is re.ally nothing but the fruit in which one has concepionally fixed this mental process.suta (the text, which explains the ground and the necessity of a primordial creatiorwith practical methodologies themselves). under the adverse impetus of a wrong view,which the two yanas and the third yana held on the (saddhamma) as objective, the au.thor of Lotus sutra proper(根本法華)corrected the error throughout. That is the verytheme of this sutra.Firstly the sutra's title presents (Saddhamma>, and that indicates the main pointof the <Saddhamma> as subject, and also suggests this point as an idiom by havingit followed by the significant term <pundarika>. This is such a traditionally effec-tive word for the india intelligentsia that it suggests to the hearers of this sutra with-out fail a certain common association and makes them anticipate a sequence as fol-lows: brahma- veda-pundarika-Akasa-atman
The author induces them along these expectations as the story advances , and hebaffles them suddenly,-as soon as it arrives at the end of the chapter of(contemplation of a stupa) and the beginning of (bodhisattvas' Gushing out ofhe Earth>,-by absolving and dissipating traditional mannerisms by means ofdexterous plots full of symbolisms: buddha- Saddharma-pundarika-Akasa-Bodhisattva4).For the historical background of its composition, various problems in the ancientIndian buddhist assemblage (samgha) of the christian era must be considered.: theteachings left behind by buddha, misunderstandings of His successive disciplesabout them, schisms according to the opposing opinions, the Edicts by king asokathe recurrence of nirvana thought and the question of right or wrong about the wor-ship of stupa. tominaga assumed an unknown bhiksu, who could create a dramawith multivocal symbolisms in order to manifest Buddha- like phenomena, even byemodelling the non-buddhist, indigenous sources of chandogya-upanisadRamayana and Samkhya philosophy. Its outline is as follows:[. IntroductionSkilful Accessonce upon a time the bhagavat was staying at Rajagriha, on the gridhrakuta-nountain, with a numerous assemblage of monks.. surrounded, attended, venera.ted by them. he sat cross-legged and at this time entered into a mental attitude be-yond description, the intense meditation, called (ananta- nirdesa-pratisthana) (thatis, mental state against infinite expositions). on looking aghast at this unprecedentedappearance, that both his body and his mind was motionless, they were all surprisedand wondered why he entered into the mysterious meditation.In the beginning of the next chapter of <Skilful Access> the bhagavat rises up.holding remembrance and intelligence of the intense meditation, and speaks tosariputra about an incomprehensible difficulty of only one buddhist yana (vehicle)for the believers of the two yanas and the third yana. Thus occurs to each mind theuuestion: "what is buddha?, the answer to which is the very theme of the nextchapter of <contemplation of Ratna-stupa>.
〓. development"Then there arose a stupa, consisting of seven precious substances, from the placsof the earth opposite the Lord, the assembly being in the middle, a stupa five hun-dred yoganas in height and proportionate in circumference." (as translated.by H.kern5))The (ratna) of (ratna-stupa> signifies the merits of tri-ratna (three jewels): buddha.Dharma and bhuksu.Then, why on earth did stupa come to be an obiect of reverence as well aBuddha?… Even if one actually enshrined the relic, it must have come naturallyinto question in the buddhist samgha, how it ought to be to deify it truly, not to beconfined to being the result of a simple ceremony. As for the sarira(relic) of Sakya.t is nothing but the dharma, which he left behind. his judgements or acts in hislifetime are in other words saddharma, but after his death it remained a singledharma, since the assurer of it did not exist anymore. Furthermore, as for sakya.there existed nothing but this dharma on the part of the samgha, which dependedonly upon the mind of bhiksus. Inasmuch as buddha is Dharma, which dependsupon bhiksus, (the contemplation of Stupa) ought to be interpreted in such a con-text. In short, the stupa, as symbol of the bequeathed dharma of buddha, ought tcbe contemplated in their minds. The question is whether a bhiksu can become aBuddha or not. we ought to pay attention to the insinuative meaning of (five) of(five hundred yojanas>, by relating all the mental events to the working of fiveskandha (aggregate). The living dharma during the buddha's lifetime, ie. saddhar-ma, became, after his death, mere objectively fixed dharma in the memory of man)bhiksus, which were in various ways modified, degraded and transferred throughthe opposing opinions, and schisms of sects to the anonymous author of lotus sutraProper, and he intended, in this chapter, to rectify the distorted views on buddhaand dharma in the samghas' bhiksus, and to make their stereotyped dharma a trulyliving one. here we have suddenly sabda (an authoritative voice),affirmative for thepreaching of Buddha, from within the stupa: "sadhu, sadhu bhagavan Sakyamunesubhasita te yam Saddharmapundariko dharma-paryayah," (Excellent, excellent, LordSakyamuni, thou hast well expounded this Dharmaparyaya of the lotus of the true law.6))Except the traditionally Indian word of <pundarika) (a white lotus, symbolising excel-
lent mind), almost all words derive from the asoka's Edict (calcutta bairat).So the main point is: by way of what sort of circumstances becomes (pundarika>(saddharma); and it is solely for this, that Bhagavat Sakya preached in various ways(for a sole object to open the eyes of creatures for the sight of Tathagata-know-ledge.
Removal of two pieces -rushing of a logocentric conceptionLogocentricity is an antonym of biocentricity, which we use as subtitle of thisstudy. According to the definition7) of Ludwig klages (1872-1956),the former is cha-racterised by the overestimation of conscience, calculation and mechanic causalityon the basis of will and grasping comprehensionNow, the owner of glorifying utterance from within the stupa is a dead buddhaPrabhutaratna Tathagata. The preaching buddha explains to Mahapratibhana theformer's long-fostered wish during his life-time, namely to have <a stupa of atma-bhava-vigraha)(perfect stupa to the memory of his soul) erected and to emerge, emittinga sabda, wherever the saddharma is preached, and in addition, under grave condi-tion, to have all his other selves in ten directions assembled.So the bhagavat emits a streak of white ray from his brow ,illuminating all thebuddhas of fifty hundred thousand koti nayuta worlds of ten directions, equal to theGanga. . They all send their respective messengers to the bhagavat, consenting toopen the stupa. Then He ascends to the stupa in the Middle-heaven, removes twopieces of the stupa by scooping out by the right(able) hand in its center-symboli-sing the removal of opposing two concepts, in order to show a whole unity-, and,welcomed by the Prabhutaratna shares the semi-seat with him. Consenting the as-sembly on the earth to ascend to contemplate the two buddhas, the living buddhamakes by his growth of idealising power the four audiences rise up to the Middle-Heaven. Here is then accomplished a right theoretical contemplation of what isBuddha.
〓. climax-a biocentric dramaSo the bhagavat proclaims his view, "who of ye can make manifest theSaddharma Pundarika dharma Paryaya in this world? I will entrust this to a quali-
fied one before my death. Now it is justly high time for that,"after Mahapratibhana, five hundred scholared bhikshus in the assembly accorwith the proposal, hoping to do in another worlds. Just then bodhisattvas from othelworlds stand up, and after having joined their hands and worshipped, beg theBhagavat to permit them to do the missionary work in this world. As soon as hethunders, "cut it out, ye bodhisattvas!", the earth quivers and splits everywhere, andfrom every rip immeasurable bodhisattvas emerge from underneath. They have re.mained under the earth, in the akasa world. after their appearance they bow to allthe bodhisattvas, fifty-antara(ier)-ka(incidents of five skandha's (samskara))elapse, during which both the bhagavat and four audiences remain solely silent-as a symptom that neither active nor passive contemplation works owing to(akasaand experience the extremely long period of time only as a moment andcome to see this world, being amid the akasa and everywhere, filled with bodhisatt-vas. here we find for the first time a complete working of samskara, as delicatelysymbolised (pundarika〉, i.e. a vivid working of enlightened experience is manifest-ed. And He discloses to Maitreyi the identity of innumerable akasa-bodhisattvas.anyone of whom he has never seen before.This scene, as well as that with the appearance of stupa, is what we call a biocen-tric drama on the basis of symbolical thinking. in the center of the question is themnconscious process of a thinking organism with metamorphosis, that seems indeeda fantastic, irrational mysticism in the so called tiefenpsychologie. but that whichplays an important part behind the scenes is (soul) (seele), not (spirit) (Geist)Exactly fitting for this description is the article about (dramatic) in a concise cod,which runs as follows: "fit for theatrical representation, sudden, striking, impres-sive."
Let us consider more minutely several original key words as clues to the symbol-ism. The entire earth, symbolised as crust of phantoms about life and world, madesolid by our egocentric attachments, quivers tremulously and explodes, and 60.000bodhisattvas of the underground-world gush out all of a sudden. (in this case, onenust regard closely the original meaning of bodhi (enlightenment) and sattva (essence). Thesymbolism of 60000,deriving from two indian classics is already mentioned.) The differ-enciating working of our egocentric intellect from circumstances stops with the dis-
appearance of subject and object, producing a sereine state of mind. (Akasa> meansan ether- like transparent vacuity, and has in itself nothing intentional to work ou1to the outside world, while what it produces, on the contrary, presupposes a tremen-dous function, by which one realises a righteousness. <Akasa> itself has no functional attributes, such as I. kant regarded as (unifying power of reason8)>. It is nota neologism of the lotus sutra proper, but its source is found in the chandogya-Upanisad.: "Now in this brahmapura is a vesma (dwelling), a small pundarika, inwhich a small akasa is, ..the very being in this akasa is what one seeks for andwants to know." (8.1.). The real value of the original author of Hokke proper con-sists in creating (bodhi) sattva) in place of (atman> as (the very being/, againstthe traditionally assumed associationSeeking to explain the symbolism of this term akasa>, we should comprehencthe changes, which come about by the influence of akasa's exercises upon the working of five skandha, behind the ordinary mental phenomena.When we analyse and consider speculatively even simple and familiar phenomena, which go by only in one second, we can hardly imagine what an innumerablecomplicated actions take place there in the meantime. accordingly, when we transpose speculatively and analytically our each of our affairs deeply to its composingfactors through a converse procedure to our daily idea of time, by distributing it tothe unit, we can count it with an enormous span time. The (pancasat)(50) symbo-lises the five skandha. The kaleidoscopic scene of changes, when the momentlyreations of five skandha's working pervade thoroughly the akasa, has been de-scribed. The genuine symbolism of this (pancasad-antara-kalpa) in this text doe:not express a temporal period. it is the very coexistence of both moment and eterni-〓y, and of both here and there As it demonstrates the potentiality of becomingBuddha of five skandha in the akasa, the sakyamuni's preaching of Saddharma=upaya-kausalya (Skilfull Access) as buddha is nothing but the fruits, which this po-tentiality bears. All members of the instructor and the instructed in the assemblyare thoroughly penetrated by the serene state of mind of the bodhisattvas from theunderground. Subsequently the situation is symbolically expressed in the manner of(fifty- inner-kalpa, silent meditation>, in order to call the attention to the situationwhere actions of five skandha's working, neither subjectively nor objectively, take
place. it is the manifestation of the very completion of samskara (rddhyabhi-samska-ra), which corresponds to the ultimate state of mind in buddha's latest days: vaya-dhamma samkhara9.(To be continued.)〔Notes)
〓
1)this period corresponds almost to that of following publications:雜誌『一』(hereinafter abridged as『-』富永先生の會・昭和12～19年),富永半次郎著/大野達之助・千谷七郎・風間敏夫ほか編『蓮華展方-原述作者の法華經(梵和對譯)』(昭和27年).富永半次郎著『釋迦佛陀本紀余論』(全21冊昭和29～38年)2)小谷幸雄「世界の中の佛陀現象富永半次郎の人間學的事跡]『印度學佛教學研究』第47卷-2號平成11年3月/252-257頁3)『-』voll pp.2-34)『ー』vol.5pp.18-195)SAcreDbokS oTH eAST, Eded byF. MAXMuLLR vol.21.TH〓RPRikAl lw, translated by hKern/ Motilal banarsidass, Delhi etc.1980p.2276)ibid. p.2367)Ludwig klages : Geist und leben3philosophie〓i) bouvier / bonn, 1974S.5938)富永半次郎述横澤高記筆『國體の信念付・根本法華』承謹會昭和17年216頁cf. The title of Achter Abschnitt: "Regulatives Prinzip der reinen vernunftin Ansehungder kosmologischen ldeen" Zweites hauptstuick /Zweites buch/Zweite AbteilungZweiter teil /.RAnSZNDNELEMNRErin the kRIK DR〓eInENVrUNFTby imanuel kant, reclam/ Stuttgart 1969)『ー』vol.36pp.18-21; vol.42pp.24-25This paper was prepared by partially correcting an unpublished manuscript, which hadbeen orally presented during the 5th international Lotus Sutra conference(4-6 May,2002,Marburg),entitled "A biocentric drama upon the stage in the Middle-heaven-chieflyfrom the Contemplation of the ratna-stupa to the issue of 60.000bodhisattvas". we alsctried to avoid the overlapping with what was previously reported in this academic review:"The Symbolism of Hokke-proper-Morphological Studies on saddharmapundarika su-tra by a private scholar-(NALINDiNanddiSSuIS, Vol. LNo.l.Dec.2002,pp.470-473)(key words> biocentric, saddharma(<The edict of king asoka),pundarika(<chandogya-Upanisad), rddhy abhi-samskare(professor Emeritus, Rissho university)
