background of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory ofdaimoku-jiuiithe 'Acceptance and Maintenance of the Sutra-title of the Lotus Sutra'WATANAbehoyo
1.acceptance and aintenance of Sutra-title in hokke buddhismIt can be said that one of the especial feature of Nichiren's hokke buddhism isthat it based on the 'Acceptance and Maintenance of sutra-title of the Lotus Sutra'.lt is needless to say, basing on the results of his studies in buddhist Studies duringhis youth, at the age of 32,Nichiren is said to have declared his faith in the lotusSutra through the "Recitation of the sutra-title of the Lotus Sutra" on april 28inthe year5 of ken-cho (1253).In fact, Nichiren's writings after this incident cohere in contents in alignmentwith the idea of 'acceptance and maintenance of the title of the Lotus Sutra'(paimoku-jui題目受持).however, it was April25of the yearl0of bun-i73),20years later of his first recitation of the title of the Lotus Sutra, that he completed theheoretical explanation of the theory of 'Acceptance and Maintenance' of daimoku.If we consider the reasons for it, several factors can be pointed out.(1)As Nichiren had very eventful days, he had to limit himself to the writing of relativelyshort works in his initial years of missionary activity.(2)Nichiren was living in the social environment, in which a rapid change could take placeespecially in religious sphere.(3)The fact that Nichiren had to encounter with various honans(法難,religious persecu-tions) successively, especially after his presentation of Rissho-Ankoku-Ron to hojo to-kiyori, the then former regent of the emperor and the actual leader of kamakura Sho-gunate on july 16 of the year l of bu-o0). The Shi-dai-Hoan四大法難,FourGreat Religious Persecutions) nichiren had to undergo are the following: i) the burningof his hermitage one month later of the presentation, ii)lzu banishment, ii) tojo per-secution, and iv) sado island banishment, i.e., (Ry-ko-honan龍口法難)of September12in the year 8 of bun-i 271).
40)background of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory of daimoku-jui (H. watanabe)However, through the experiences of such hoan(法難),Nichiren could em-body shiki-doku(色読)of tthe Future prediction of the Lotus Sutra'(法華経の未来記).regarding Shiki-doku, Nichiren often mentioned that it was the reading of ttheFuture prediction of the Lotus Sutra' through the experience in the process of thelife guided by the belief in the Lotus Sutra.Through such experiences of religious persecutions and difficulties, Nichirencould actualize the Future Prediction of the Lotus Sutra'. He gradually came toconnect the idea of relief from such sufferings by the mercy of the buddha ofEternal life(久遠本仏)with the establishment of solid faith to Accept and Maintainthe daimoku'. The conceptual theory on the daimoku-juji was finally revealed inthe Nyorai-metsugo-Go-Gohyaku-sai-shi-kanin-honzon-sho(如来滅後五五百歳始観心本尊抄).
In this paper, basing on the interpretations in alignment with tradition ofNichiren buddhist Studies, holding the question in mind if nichiren really main-tained silence o daimoku-juji for20years or not, we intend to examine as muchas possible his writings to find the idea of daimoku-jui.2.elucidation of the ida of daimoku-juii appearing in nyorai-metsu-go-go-Gohyaku-saishi-kaniin-honzon-shoAs has been mentioned above, though nichiren declared the foundation ofNichiren hokke Sect at the age of 32in the 5th year of kencho, he never openlystated the essence and the logic of his teaching. although the essentials of 'theAcceptance and Maintenance of the Lotus Sutra' was revealed in Shugo-kokka-Ron(守護国家論),which he wrote when he was38,it was not at all the statement otfrank revelation of the essence and logical foundation of daimoku-jui.Ikaimoku-sho(開目抄),the work he wrote when he was51. he revealed thetheory of 'tchi-Nen-san-Zen', basing on his conviction of being a 'prophet of theLotus Sutra' which he gained through his personal experience of religious persecu-tions, and the meaning of the daimoku. however, for the full explanation of the en-tire picture of the theory of daimoku-juji, we had to wait until the emergence ofNyorai-netsugo-go- Gohyaku-sai-shi-kaniin-honzon-sho, which was written irApril25of the year 10of bun-i273), when nichiren was52. it was after full20
ackground of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory of daimoku-jui h. watanabe)(141)years since his establishment of his new sect.Among them, here, we intend to deal with the idea of daimoku. According tcthe traditional understanding, the essence of Nichiren's daimoku-jui is shown inthe section of what is traditionally called daimoku no sanju-snii d'(33charac-ters on daimoku Section',題目の三十三字段)or jinen j-y dAutomaticallyTransferred Section',自然譲与段):"shaku-son no ingyo katoku no ni-ho wa vo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo no Goji ni gusoku suru. warera kono go-ji wo jui sureba, iinen mikano inga no kudoku wo yuzuri atae Tamau."(釈尊の因行果徳の二法は妙法蓮華経の五字に具足す。我等此の五字を受持すれば、自然に彼の因果の功徳を譲り与えたまう。"TheNidanas and phalas of the buddha sakyamuni are equipped in the5 characters of Myo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo. if we accept and maintain the5 characters of the sutra-title, the Nidanas(因)and phalas(果)of the eternal buddha would be automatically transferred to us." (ShowaTeihon Nichiren Shonin bun,立正大学日蓮華教学研究所編p.711.)Summary: Though many sutras were cited, it means that the great cause ofBuddha's religious austerities (Shu-in-no-Gyo-ho,修因の行法)and the broad meritthe buddha accumulated (kan-ka-No-Toku-ho,感果の徳法),all of them are equippedin the5 characters of yo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyoThe word 'shu-in-No-Gyo-' includes all the religious austerities and reli-gious trainings the bodhisattva underwent during3,000kalpas of period since histaking vow of attaining buddhahood and of leading people in north-east region tcsalvation. it is shown clearly that the entire religious austerities and trainings theBuddha had undergone are equipped in the5 Chinese characters of yo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo. The word 'k-ka-no-Toku-' signifies the entire teaching preached bythe Eternal buddha during his50billion kalpas of period in the world of ten direc-tions and in the three periods of the past, the present and the future. The entire mer-its of the Eternal buddha, which associated with his constantly preached teachings,are equipped in the very 5 characters of yo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyoTherefore, if we, common people in appo age, accept and maintain the5characters of yo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo, it says, the entire religious austerities theEternal buddha underwent and the whole merits arising out of the teachings of theEternal buddha will be handed over to us. That is to say, if a lay man accepts andmaintains the5characters of 〓yo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo, the religious austerities the
(42)background of the Formation of nichiren's Theory of daimoku-uii (h. waTANAbEBuddha with eternal Life underwent and the entire merits of teachings of theEternal buddha will be automatically transferred to him.Thus, it is emphasized that the religious training the buddha underwent sincethe beginning of the universe and the very missionary activities of the EternaBuddha since the day of his attainment of the buddhahood are in the5 charactersof myo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo. So if we accept and maintain the5 characters, it meansthat all the Hetus and phalas of the Eternal buddha will be automatically trans-ferred to the one who accepts and maintains the daimoku.3.the appeal of eternal buddha sakyamuni to the innocent livingBeings in appo ageSince heian period, people were tormented by the fear of the arrival of Mappo.the period of degenerated Law. it seems that the expectation for being wrapped inthe mercy of the buddha in Mappo period had been something that are beyond ourimagination today. The foundation of those activities for encouraging pure landBuddhism by Eikan, Genshin, honen and etc. appears to rest on such expectations.Contrary, Nichiren questioned the Pure Land buddhists' attitude of denying allother buddhist traditions by bundling them up as Sho-do-on(聖道門),and of ad-vocating the idea that the salvation could be attained only through jo-do on(浄土門,pure Land Gate).The main points of Nichiren's criticism appear to rest in the following:(1)The fact that Pure Land buddhist did not pay any attention on shi-do(此土),this verySaha-world.
(2)lt is true that various theories exist, if we discuss the matter in detail. Conclusively, wemay be able to point out that Nichiren, basing on tendai idea of Shaba-Soku-jakko(娑婆即寂光),perfected in taking belief in the grdrakuta Pure land(霊山浄土)of eternalBuddha which he believed to exist in this actual world of suffering. The phrase 'shaba-Soku-jakko' appears to mean the fact that the 'Serene light of Pure land' should beobserved in relation to the reality of this painful Saha-world. nichiren further believedthat the lotus Sutra should be preached on the Grdrakuta for eternity on the basis ofthe phrases in Nyorai-juryo-hon. it means that we can continue to receive the help otthe Eternal buddha in the grdrakuta Pure land
Background of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory of daimoku-jui H. watanabe)(143The end section of kanjin-honzon-Sho states the following:〓ehare mureba, chi akiraka nari.(天晴れぬれば、地明らかなり。"if the sky is clear. itbecomes clear also on the earth.")Hokke wo shiru monoha, Seho wo ebeki ka.(法華を識る者は、世法を得べきか。"Thosewho know the teachings of the Lotus Sutra should attain this worldly knowledge.")Ichi-nen-sanzen wo shirazaru mono niha, hotoke, dai-jihi wo okoshite, Go-ji no uchi mikono tama wo isutsumi, Matsu-dai yo-chi no kubi mi kakesashime tamau.(一念三千を識らざる者には、佛、大慈悲を起こして、五字のうちにこの珠をつつみ、末代幼稚の頸に懸けさしめたまう。"To those who do not have the knowledge of ichi-Nen-sanzen, the buddhaworking his great mercy, make the innocent person living in Mappo period to wear thenecklace of the jewel wrapped in5characters of yo-ho-ren-Ge-kyoShidai-bosatsu no kono hito wo shu-go shi tamawn koto, tai-ko, Shu-ko no Sei-owshobushi, shiko ga kei-tei ni jibu seshi ni kotonara zru mono narii.(四大菩薩のこの人を守護したまわんこと、大公・周公の成王を摂扶し、四皓が惠帝に侍奉せしに異ならざるものなり。"The protective attitude of the Four great bodhisattvas to the person is as equal ahow the ancient Tai-ko and shu-ko served the king Sei, or how four sages helped the em-peror kei.) [Showa teihon nichiren shonin bun, p.720.]Summary: if the sky becomes clear, it becomes blight on the earth. Accordingto this natural law, if we ascertain the understanding of buddhism, it can be saidthat for those who do not understand the buddha's teaching of Ichi-Nen-Sanzen, theEternal buddha, working his great mercy, wraps the teaching of ichi-Nen-Snzen irthe5characters of yo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo, and makes the people ignorant of theBuddha's teaching wear the necklaces made with the gem.In the lotus Sutra, the buddha with eternal Life revealed for the first time theexistence of Earth emerging bodhisattvas whose numbers are equal to those ofsands of ,000Ganges river, whom the eternal buddha had been instructing, andwho were unknown even to the immediate disciples of Sakyamuni buddha. TheBuddha ordered the Earth Emerging bodhisattvas, who are the hon-Ge-no-bosatsu(本化の菩薩,bodhisattvas instructed by the eternal buddha), the missionary activities inthis Saha world after the demonstration of the demise of the buddha. Those origi-nal disciples were lead by the Four bodhisattvas: j-Gy-bostsu(上行菩薩,Bodhisattva visista-caritra), muhen-Gyo-bostsu(無辺行菩薩,bodhisattva Ananta-cari-tra), jo-Gyo-bostsu(常行菩薩,bodhisattva visuddha-caritra) and amryi-Gyo-bosatsu
144)background of the Formation of nichiren's Theory of daimoku-jui (h. waTANAbe)(安立行菩薩,supratisthita-caritra). there is no doubt for the Four great bodhisattvalo protect the base and inferior people who believe in the significance of the5 characters of Myo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo in Mappo period. if we read chinese history, wefind the cases of ancient chinese philosophers Tai gong wang(太公望)and ZhouGong dan(周公旦)assisted the young king cheng wang(成王),and of the foursages, living in shang-shan(商山)to avoid war turmoil, who supported the Emperor〓ui di(惠帝).even if the person is base and inferior in nature, if he believe in thesignificance of the 5 characters of yo-ho-Ren-ge-kyo, the disciples of the Eternalbuddha, ie. the Earth Emerging bodhisattvas, serve the person as they serve theEternal buddha.The words are so commonly known to the followers of Nichiren buddhism thalthey can recite the sentences without mistake as they learned the words by heart. itNould be pity for the understanding of Nichiren, if the real importance of the wordsis not realized. here we can see how we should respect the Eternal buddha. whcencompasses the past, the present and the future. Moreover, the words also show theentire picture of guidance of the eternal buddha and the nature of salvation of infe.rior people in appo.4. The spirit of Integration of buddhist traditions behind the idea ofdaimoku-juii
Searching for synthetic understanding of many buddhist scriptures and for thebasis of belief in buddhism, the buddhism introduced into China from India inspired for integrative understanding of buddhist traditions. Asking for a solution tcthe above-mentioned subject, the Thirteen Sects of China attempted at arriving tcthe integrative understanding of buddhist traditions by using the technique of kyo-so-hn-jaku(教相判釈,systematic arrangement in order of sutras, according to contents).In the buddhism spread to the north-east region of Asia, strong faiths inMaitreya bodhisattva and Amitabha buddha were observed, as has been demon-strated by the construction of formidable images and sculptures. The associatingfaith in Avalokitesvara bodhisattva was also prevalent. It is generally known thatthe vairocana buddha of hua-yen Sutra was installed in Todai-i temple in nara inJapan. however, the same buddha was called differently according to its being
Background of the Formation of Nichirenis Theory of daimoku-jui h. wataNabe)(145)dharma-kaya(法),samboga-kaya(報)or nirmana-kaya(応身)in the light ofTri-kaya theory.〓nchina, it is said that construction of large buddha images on the basis ofHua-yen Sutra was carried out for integrating many buddhas appearing in scrip-tures. Thus, it is significant that both the theoretical kyo-o-han-jaku and the spiritfor systematic unification of buddhas at that time were moving towards the integra-tion of buddhism.In Japan also, it cant be said that there existed the system of kokubun-ji andthe movement for the establishment of Mahayana vinaya platform(円頓戒壇)bySaicho. if we observe the situation from such standpoint, it seems to be understand-able that Nichiren felt a crisis of buddhism in Japan, especially facing the rapid de-velopment and spread of Pure land buddhism, and that he took a vow to restore theBuddhism on the basis of the teaching of the Lotus Sutra.InNyorai-Metsugo-Go-Gohyaku-sai-shi-kaniin-honzon-sho, Nichiren speaks thus.Toute iwaku, kono kyomon no ken-shi-ken-koku w Ikan.(問うて曰く、この経文の遣使還告は如何。"question. what does the episode of Sending messengers to the house to tethe children who lost clear mind' (ken-shi-Gen-koku) mean in the Sutra?")kotae te iwaku, shi-e nari. shi-e mi shi-shu ari...(答えて曰く、四依なり。四依に四類あり。…"answer. it means Four refuges. They are 4 types of Four Reliable Masters towhom we can take refuge.………)shi ni hon-mon no s-, i-yu Sen-kai wa mappo no hajime mi shutugen subesi. ima nken-shi-ken-koku w jii-yu nari. Ze-ko-ro-yku towa jjuryo-hon no kaniin iaru yo, tai,Shu, yo-u, kyo no Namu-yo-ho-Ren-ge-kyo kore nari..(四に本門の四依地涌千界は末法の始めに出現すべし。今の遣使還告は、地涌なり。是好良薬とは、壽量品の肝心たる名・体・宗・用・教の南無妙法蓮華経是なり。‥"the fourth is the refuge of hon-mon. earth emerging one thousand worlds should appear at the beginning of Mappo pe-riod. present ken-shi-Gen-koku is earth emerging one. z-k-Ro-yaku [The splendidgood medicine] signifies the profound teachings of Name, body, Reality, working ancTeaching, the essence of the chapter of Eternal life of the buddha, of the very NamuMyo-hou-Ren-Ge-kyo.)[Showa teihon Nichiren Shonin bun, pp.716-717.]General meaning: A question is asked. what does the episode of 'sending mes-senger to the house to tell the children who lost clear minds', appearing in theChapter of the Eternal Life Duration of the buddha mean? Answer. in the world
after the death of the buddha, four stages of bodhisattvas would deliver the essencof the buddha's instruction. Among the four stages, there will be four types ofthem.……The fourth is the Shi-e(四依,Four Refuges) of Honmon(本門).wherthe earth trembles, many Great bodhisattvas reaching to the one thousand worldsemerging from the Earth appear for the rescue of the people of Mappo period.Therefore, the episode of 'sending messengers to the house to tell the children wholost clear minds' means the fact that the Earth Emerging bodhisattvas emerge nowin Mappo period. This Splendid good medicine' is the medicine prescribed for thepeople of Mappo, meaning the Namu-yo-o-ren-Ge-kyo which was preached tobe preserved as the essence of the chapter on the eternal Life of the buddha(Chapter l6 of yo-Ho-Ren-Ge-kyoThus, Namu-yo-o-Ren-Ge-kyo is not just the name of the sutra. it has theBody(本),and it also contains all the hetus and phalas(因果)of the buddha. iihas the working(働き)and it has the aspect of the very teaching(教法)that enve-lopes them. Thus Namu-yo-ho-Ren-Ge-kyo contains five-fold profound teachingsi.e., Name, body, Hetus and Phalas, working and Teaching. This Five-fold profoundteaching is called 'go-ji-Gen-Gi(五重玄義).Furthermore, in order to instruct his disciples the structure of buddhism, weknow that Nichiren often illustrated a chart depicting the structure, like lchi-dai-Go-jii-kei-u(一代五時鶏図)and etc. In one of them, like other ichi-dai-Go-ji-kei-zu and ichi-dai-Go-ji-Zu, kegon sutra(華厳経),agon sutra(阿含経),ho-to sutra(方等経),Hannya sutra(般若経)and the lotus Sutra(法華経)were mentioned, toeach of which related commentaries, name of sects basing on them, the name of thefounder priests and etc. were mentioned on lower section of the pages. In the sectiorof the Lotus Sutra, we find the names like, Sho-shu-e-hyo-hu(諸宗依憑宗),butu-ryu-shu(佛立宗),ten-dai-shu(天台宗),pokke-shu(法華宗),himitu-shu(秘密宗),and ken-ro-shou-shu(顯露彰宗)being listed side by side. (Showa teihon NichirelShomin lbun,p.2337.)In the first Sho-shu-e-hyo-shu(諸宗依憑宗),we may be able tread the spirit of integration of Buddhism which we discussed above.5. conclusionAbout the idea of daimoku-jlui, as has been discussed above, the discussions
appear to have been limitedly carried out only within the Nichiren buddhist circleor the logical understanding of the concept, we have to wait until the emergence ofKaimoku-sho and kaniin-honzon-sho. however, as Nichiren started reciting thepaimoku from the year5 of kencho, it seems to be certain that the logical basis ofthe daimoku-jui had existed within deep inside of the mind of Nichiren.In shugo-kokka-Ron, Nichiren did not speak of the profound logical argumenfor the theory of automatically transferring of both hetus and phalas of the eternalbuddha. however, the meanings of wholeheartedly Accepting' (Ichinen-shinin,一念信受)the eternal buddhais guidance and of wholeheartedly believing in' (zuiki,随喜)the guidance have been discussed on the basis of the chapter 17of Mvo-h-Ren-ge-kyo which assists in explaining the real essence of the Nyorai-juryo-hon(如来壽量品),the crux of the lotus Sutra.Though it is clearly demonstrated in Nichiren's writings of later years, weshould not also forget the very fact that Nichiren had long before established thefundamental interpretations on the 'Acceptance and Maintenance of the lotus Sutra'and on chanting of daimoku (sutra title,題目),basing on the spirit for the integrationof various buddhist traditions under the lotus Sutra.参照)上田本昌博士喜寿記念論文集『日蓮聖人と法華仏教』(2007年3月)所収,拙論「日蓮聖人初期の題目受持勧奨について」key words) Nichiren, daimoku-juji, kuon-shakuson, Nyorai-Meisugo-go-Gohyaku-sai-shi-kaniin-honzon-Shd(professor Emeritus, Rissho university)
