The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesEast meets west: bruno petzold and haniiro tominaga,Comparative studies on buddhism and Goethe (〓)Kotani Yukio
In our last report " East meets west ()",we gave chiefly the accounton petzold's andTominaga's studying accomplishments. This time, however, by focusing also on their secu-lar lives, we take a look from a global point of view, the comparative-cultural studies ofthese two contemporaries in the first half of the twentieth centur)Having specialized in philosophy, psychology and economics, bruno petzold(1873-1949)served as acoirespondent for ten years iFrankfurt, london and paris, he wasdispatched i china and came to japan in190with his wife hanka, who had arrived ayear earlier and taken the post of a professor in the tokyo Music School, teaching vocalmusic. with the beginning of the first world war he retired from his iournalism activitiesand became a professor of German language at the first high School (the present cultureFaculty of tokyo university). during his stay in japan he had an opportunity to visi1Enryakuii-Temple at the mount hiei near kyoto. From this visit his interest in buddhismbegan, and he tried, despite being over forty years old, to study steadily the tendai'smetaphysical theory of the trinity of emptiness, temporality and middle and could masterit later systematically. to this approach Schelling's theory of the identity of three potencies,which petzold esteemed highly, gave him strong support. one cannot neglect that petzold'sstudy was based oh the hunanitarian motive, which aimed at an ideal intermediar vbetween east and west, while he objected drastically, as a pacifist, against the Nazism. ofthese circumstances volker zotz gives us a proper interpretation:In such a manner the buddhist studies of petzold consisted, for the most part, in working out thecorrespondencies between the european and buddhist thoughts.This search for possible knotting-points was not considered for him as play in an ivory tower, butas requisite to retrench potential conflicts of the two cultures with the background of the politicaltendencies of the period between the two great wars. petzold believed in the necessity. to harmo-nize all spiritual mights of the humankind, and to make understand to the statesmen and scholars.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesworkmen and farmers of all the world that the humanity is one and that it would perish, if it forgetsthe spiritual unity. . the ontology of the tendai-School knows "Three truths"":1. Each circumstance is finally empty. 2.to the circumnstance, however, is the reality also ascribed in its possibleexperience. 3. because the highest truth comprehends the emptiness as well as the reality ofall thecircumstances in the same way. petzold combines this model with schelling's teaching of the threepotencies: 1 of the universal possibility to the being (Seiende), 2of the purely being (rein Sei-ende) and s of the can-be (sein-konnen) and of the being (sein) iacotnprehending superreali-ty.. goethe was valued as special connecting link between west and East. goethe's conformitywith the mahayana, which etzoldexamined, allowed him to findin buddhism the possible themesfamilliar to europe, such as God and the essence proper to the man. goethe's religion marks, ac-cording to petzold, the recognition of the unity of God and nature, of the macrocosmos and the mi-crocosmos, of the supersensual and the sensual, of the infinite and the finite. however diverse theideas, which goethe professed, may be, the unity's idea of all the world was his two componentsThe same sort of representation, petzold recognized in the Mahayana-buddhism with the teachingof avatamisakasutrc, that each one should be present in each of the other. "eThe notion of side byside and with one another, which is familiar to an ordinary person is replaced by the into one an.other" in the pure mahayana-buddhism, as well as in the goethe's world-views and the highes1contents, that appear to common experience, as they are put together from pieces, reveal them-selves as a multiple, infinitely differenciated unity." goethe's God-nature-notion, says petzold, is "adynamic one"", which emphasizes love's power, "leading the world and men to higher and higherdestinations."Here also its parallel relations to the mahayana stand steadfast. in the tendai-, as well as in the ke-〓on-school "ethe absolute would be dynamically grasped. as summaty of all material, ideally lead-ing to higher and higher development pushing powers. .. but the fact, that an european presentedBuddhist teaching as having an equal right with Goethe, Fichte or schelling, was an importantbreak with the former practice to regard buddhism either as inferior to the european and a danger-ous mental cutrent or, as a better alternative to the western culture like many buddhists thought. inJapanese buddhist circles petzold found much notice, since they started from the equivalence oftheir own religious and cultural tradition to that of Europe, from where they had received scienceand technology. in the west, however, the time was still premature for the petzold's first effortshis buddhist works appeared -if at all-i japan and remained in Germnany almost ineffec-tive.2)trans. kotani)In order to avert the misunderstanding, which might arise from the title of this study,"East meets west : b.petzold and h. Tominaga-comparative studies on buddhism andGoethe -",we iust allude here to the following two circumstances:1.goethe made mention neither of the buddha nor of buddhism.2.petzold and tominaga had neither personal acquaintance nor mutual reference.Nevertheless there was a strarnge relation between these contemtemporaries. petzold
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesEast meets west: bruno petzold and hanjiro tominaga (y. kotan)(185took his post at the first hligh Schoolas professor of german language. in one of his lectureshe wrote on the blackboard a line from the "prologue in heaven' of goethe's fust:ES irrt der mensch, solang' er strebt.〓an ever errs the while he strives. trans. w. arndt)。it was the very phrase that incited, tominaga, with the mephisto's satire against asbuse of humnan reason in the same prologue, to his later genuine study of goethe. we noteby way of a side remark that he cited the latter in the foreword of the issue no.2of the be-low mentioned magazine ichi and the former in that of the issue no.,in his own trans-laions. during the period of 1932-33he delivered lectures on oriental classics, to whichvolunteer students of this high school andof tokyo imperial university attended, in the as-sembly hall of a temple named gangyoji, which was situated near by at the rear of the highschool. it was not strange that their paths should cross each other on the road. having in-roduced in Japanese the biography of tominaga in this journal ten years ago4, we givehere only an brief account on it.Born itokyo, hanjiro tominaga (1883-1965)left the tokyo imperial university withthe course unfinished, unsatisfied with its academic style of second-hand knowledge, aiming at achieving the motto: 'out of asia, into europel" expecting to the embodiment andmanifestation of a unified personality, he read extensively ten thousands of classical Japa-nese, chinese and european books. being not contented with the chinese translation of theSuddharmundarika sutra by kumaraiiva, he began, about at the age of 40years, tclearn untutored the sanscrit and pali languages. after the kanto grand earthquake. workedin the society for the preservation old temples and shrines and for Social education. unde1the control of the education ministry. hereafter he published, as the chief editor(927-29)of the monthly magazine ofakatsuki (dawn), wrote hinself articles. such as "hadaka nshugyo"(naked mental discipline), "asoka ono hoko tekiyo"(asoka's admonishing dhar-ma) and "gishin anki7(suspicion about the soviet Union).In his sekui bummei hihom(thecritique of the world civilization,1934)he rectified the word of 〓bunmei' (wenming). whichhas been used as equivalent for civilization, according to the original meaning of chineseclassics (of Shuking). the principal themes of the monthly magazine (the vehicle of hislectures), named ichi (unity) (complete69 vols19744),are "hokke"(lotus sutra proper)."rongo"(lun Yu, the analects of confucius), "kamakura jidai no bukkyo"(buddhism in theKamakura era) and "shiteki zen shu kan"(historical view of zen-sect). the following
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies〓ast meets west: bruno petzold and hanjiro tominaga (y. kotani)underlined words from a long series of lectures numbering 22"living examination ofvaya-dhammma samkhara, which should be practisedin one's mind as a method of obtainingan unified virtue"(徳の方法…己心中所行・の吟味)was borrowed from ian tai Zh〓4).(underlined by kotani )The chinese term of宗教zong jiao originates, tominaga interprets, in tian tai Zhi yi.The(宗〉,as vital point, means principally a practical methodology, and the<教〉representsa doctrine. The(宗教〉of sakya-buddha is, as doctrine of self-reliance, not so-called religion'as belief in Godor brahman) is "the self-completion face to the universe", and has " nothingin it, that demands any salvation from without." and the effect which the hokke-properxpects is also the contemplation of a cosmically arranged position of each man. if thatbecomes reality, it is the key to aright judgment, which consists in the mature functioningof panca skandhabove all of samskaros): thoroughly creative thinking in abiocentric' way, (i.e not in a 'logocentric' way), to borrow the two adjectives from klages'serminology.),)asa fruit of his mute recitation of this phrase of vay-dhammd samkhora for about teryears, tominaga was able to produce, after the second world war, his life-works. In hisplace of refuge in Gumma-prefecture, he wrote first, " about a supreme enlightenment-Comparative studies on buddha-phenomena-"(正覺に就いて),where he criticized theso-called sakya-buddha's gaya-enlightenment at the age of thirty-five years, as immatureand unthorough, judging from his own life experience discovered and obtained and ob-tained himself from the buddha's mature and thoroughgoing last precept: vaya-dhammasamkhara and five years later in his "My supplemental Essay oroyal biography of sakyabuddha"(釋迦佛陀本紀余論)he wrote about mnystic tuining of goethe's frame of mind irhis last one and half years with the renewed second patt of Faust, which was unknow onotnoticed till then.and its similarity with the Schelling's:Here we introduce petzold's own interpretation on the core of the tendai-philosoph〓
Tendai asserts : to rellect absolute reason, the humnan mind must make use not only of concentrationor collectedness (shi) but also of contemmplationor observation (kwan) and must identify itself notonly with emptiness (ku) but also with temporality (ke) and the middle (chu ). tendai, accordingly,represents a positive ontology, teaching suchness (shinnyo sk. bhutatatha) that fills up emptiness(ku sk。 sunyta),the identity of opposites, the discursive thought valued as acconmnodated" truth.
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesEastmeets west: bruno petzold and hanjiro tominaga (y. kotanI)(18Its samadhi or meditation is that of existence based on non-existence, the fundamental idea of thesadcrarm ) pundlerik sutraokke kyo) and the mh parinirvang sutra i nehurGyo).7
Giordano bruno repeated itin latin: omne simile simiti cognoscitur. and Schelling too was of theopinion that the knowing and the known must be of the same kind, "not i know," says schelling,"but only the universe within me knows, provided that the knowledge which icall mine is real, trueknowledge.. one and the same cause produces in the merely knowable part of the world therecognizability, in the knowing part the fecognition. all that is knowable must have upon it theimpress of the knowing.. that is of reason, of intelligence, even if it is not the knowing itself."chisha daishi and his tendai school adhere to the same principle fromn the standpoint of any fullyinformed and competent adherent of the tendai doctrine, the deepest and innermost essence of allthings is one, and this 〓ainone" is knowable, thatis self-knowledge, sice except for ourselvefthere are no means whereby the ainone can be known,we add here petzold's another reference to goethe in his Goethe und der ahayanabudchismus.9)Goethe is the representative of a particular idea-doctrine, which he names the teaching of the en-telechy or of the monads. what Goethe understands by ideas, are not those, which do not spring upfrom the restricted human spirit, but obiective essences, which come forth from the cosmos itself orfrom the reason of the deity. . the teaching of the entelechy or the of entelechial monads is that ofthe imperishable and living particular reality, that is, of lower and higher particular powers, whichform, may be remembered, a step-realm, whose highest grade make up the human souls, of whichthe noblest and the purest are allotted to the immortality. This teaching of goethe was characterizedas incompatible with a severe pantheismby us, andso far as a analogy to this exists in the religiorof mahayana buddhism, we should establish a modification or free interpretation ofreligious pan-theistic principles. (trans. kotani)Hideo kobayashi, interpreted that the prainaparamitasutra, indeed, as a sketch-map ofthe philosophical wisdom of Gautama buddha, but it frequently repeats the term ofsunyata (emptiness空),which changes consequently itself into bhava (existence有),so hecannot call it the sketch-map of the whole personality of buddha.. he continued, "buddhawas of opinion that the world, both natural and mental-could be reduced to the interdepen-dence of these panca khandha, five, so to speak, categories, . he knew intuitively so at therisk of all his personality, and such a scheme concerning of the world could not appear bythe postulate of his understanding.. every thought is like a coin, which becomes dirty byfalling into other hands, . what one calls  pessimism' or 'nihilism' in case of buddhism,alludes to this filthiness."10)(trans. kotani)
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesas concerns 'the source and the coiruption of the idea' (kobayashi), petzold followedfaithfully the history of mahayana buddhism, which was broad-minded and tolerant of allsorts of thoughts, reduplicating the termof "emptiness", while tominaga tried to realize inhimself 'an unity of the whole personality', i.e.the completion of the five categories,especially of 'samskara-skandha' (composing-power). we summarize his interpretation ofthe developmental process of the tendai's identity of three truths: emptiness-temporality-middle, which petzold estimated as the climax of the Mahavana.The two-yana (vehicle) ie. sravaka(聲聞)and pratyeka-budcha(縁覺)turned existenceinto 〓emptiness", in order to rise above the suffering of pleasure-pain and life-death, andtcwant to femain in the eternal comfort of nirvama. subsequently the followers of so-calledHinayana bodhisattva's school developed dialectically the idea of both 〓existence" andemptiness'(亦有亦空)or "temporality'(假):this is what the prainaporamitosutra preaches.〓llis vanity, vanity is al"(色即是空空即是色)i.e. "dualillumination'(双照).this principledeveloped in the mahayana, more dialectically, to turn itself to that of 〓neither existence noiemptiness'(非有非空)or dual negation'(双非).one has no choice but to call it madhya(middle): this is precisely nagariuna's idea of praind" (transcendental wisdom). tominaga'sremarks, that a second look at the reality from the point of dual negation, if we speak ill ofit, can be said to be a speculative play or a play of concepts. it is only the product of ourexpectation, that we want to look at real existences somehow or other during our lifetime,giving some value, which could satisfy our mind, to them. considering so, one must sa)that the Mahayana idea is not particularly new, but a thing that was a contrived expressiorbased on knowledge of idea developed in the upanisads. in this way kumarajiva under theNagariuna's direction might have translated saddharma into wonderful law(妙法)with theview of this wonderful existence(妙有).in the mudhyamika school(中觀派),by means ofwhich one has another look at a real existence, on the standpoint of dual negation (summmarizedby kotani ).11),12),13)as for the above-mentioned petzold's dialectical disposal of oppositesinto the identity and his 〓alione", tominaga showed these circumstances ina quitedifferent way.The very removal of opposing conceptions symbolized as dve bhitti (two pieces) in thechapter of Ratna stupa of hokke proper is the best way to contemplate the whole-one-ness vividly. because it is impossible to unite two opposing conceptions with an equalvalue, e. g.the subjective extreme (vennunftreasoprajna) and the objective extreme (ding-
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiesan-sich/thing-in-itself, ie. reality-view實相)by means of understanding! to exercise the op-posing conceptions thoroughly to the exhaustion to the way of Socrates, who conqueredhe aporia ( the state of being at a loss), realizing a perfect personality! (underl. by kotani)14),15Notes
3)j.w.v. goethe 〓tragedy translated by walter arndt w.w. norton company New1)bruno Petzold, goethe und der ahoyaa buddhismus. wien: octopus, 1982.2)volker zot auf den gluckseligen inselnbudchismus i er dentschen kulur theseusBerlins.186-193.York londonp.8.4)kotani, yukio. 〓buddha-like phenomena in the world: anthropological accomplishments ofhanjiro tominaga (introduction)(世界の中の佛陀現象-富永半次郎の人間學的事跡-(序説))."journl ofindicd buddhist studies vol.47 no.2(21)54f.5)ichi, no.1, tominagasensei no kai,1937,14-18.6)kotani, Yukio. "ludwig klages and hanjiro tominaga: two non-academic scholoars onBiocentric anthropology(生中心の人間學-ルートヴィツヒ・クラーゲスと富永半次郎-(序説))."bulletinofthe rissho university gradhate school no.18(2002)1-49.7)bruno petzold: 〓buddhisf meditarionThe transaction of the asiatic society of Japan,cseries v.1.1948p.91).8)ibid.p.93.
9)See note 1.54ff.10)kobayashi, hideo. "my view of Life(私の人生観)."kobayashi hideo collection(小林秀雄集),tokyo: chikumashobo,1956303f.11)ichi, no.2hokke-proper, 1937,36ff.12)ichi, No.24hokke-proper, 1941,42ff.13)kotani, yukio. "Fire and logos: heraclitus, buddha and nichiren." hokke buddhhist studies inCultural historyssayscommemorationof the seventieth birthdy' of professor watamabeHoyo)(渡邊寶陽先生古稀記念論文集法華仏教文化史論叢),2003121-128.14)kotani, yukio. "correction of the idea of nirvana: basing on the symbolism of hokke-proper(涅槃概念の是正-法華經・見寳塔品のシンボリズムを中心に).2the jourmal of nichire,budhhist studies(大崎学報)no.159003)47177.15)kotani, Yukio. "The symbolism of hokke-proper (〓a biocentric drama upon the stagein the Middle-heaven (i)." journal of indicn ad buddhist studies vol.55s No.3(2007):〓
148-153.
key words  trinity of emptiness, temporality and middle, prajna, whole-oneness, vaya-dham-ma samkhara
(Professor emeritus, rissho university)
