The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesSome doctrinal Peculiaritties andtheanswerer's Profle seen in the kensho obutsyu-/on, the theatiesoneing ones nattre and ataining budhahod : kensho jobunsul-ronin the kanazawa bunko collectioFURUSe Tamami1.IntroductionThe kensho jobutsu-ron見性成佛論has been assumed to be a text belonging to thedaruma school. but until very recently no detailed studies supporting the ascription hasbeen published. in a previous paper,  iargue that there are strong reasons to believe thathe kensho jobutson is closely felated to dainichibo nonin himself. This actuallypinpoints the attribution with more accuracy than simply stating that the text belongs to thedaruma school.2.the fundamental philosophy from citationThe philosophy advocated in the kersho jobusuron seens to have been strongly in-fluenced by the southern chan tradition of the tang dynasty, particularly by mazu's馬祖school. in the kersho jobutsron, the answerer(答者)quotes4old and wise sentencesor paragraphs from the chm yuhu禪語録,possibly from the jingde chuandeng lu景徳傳燈録,the zongiing lu宗鏡録and some other sutras or commentaries. he also cites 5 timesfrom dazhu huihai大珠慧海(dates unknown) who was one of Mazu daovi's馬祖道一(〓09-788) disciples and also cites other masters of the southein chan branch. in the japa-nese monastic communities, the zomgriing lu was a popular text since the heian period.It is well-known that the daruma school regarded the zongiing las an important tex1of their sect. according to ISHII. the doctrines of the zongiing lu are clearly refected inthe joto shokoku-ron成等正覺論of the kanazawa bunko collection. I shall mentionhere only a few of the differences seen between the kensho job and the jotoshokaku-ron. The latter mostly consists of quotations from the zongiingl while thekersho iobuisuron cites quite a few ftom the chcy sources. the joto shokakismore like a buddhist ceremonial script while the kensho jobu is redacted in the
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiestme dhchimalpccullarities mndteanswee's prufle seenin the kensho juhitiu-r , the fleies om seeing one hat andamtimig udatood (.furbs )(17form of a catechism in which buddhist teachings are taught by an questioner(問者)to ananswerer(答者).therefore, the style and wording ofthe jioto shokaku-ron are more foimaland stylized than those in the kensho jobutsu-ron. on the other hand, in the kenshoiobutsu-ron, the whole text, except for the preface(序),is written inacolloquial style.3. focusingon the dialogue: en and TeachingsThere areuestion and answers in the kensho jobusn. one of the most important parts is the4h dialogue (179l5-1846) in which the answerer (possibly nonin himself)reveals his Zen禪philosophy contrasting it to the "teachings'教,a temm construed as re-ferring to mere theoretical, scholastic views.The answerer firstly explains the teachings and practices characteristics of what hetakes as being the scholastic approach, particularly ofthe tendai school. he quotes baozhi's寶誌(418-514)strong criticism of vinaya masters律師.The answerer argues that enor-mous time is needed if people follow doctrines different fromZen. Then he explains zenor the chool of the buddha's mind:Next, the school of the buddha's mind makes clear that one realizes the essence of mind immedi-ately, and consequently his or her senses and perceptions work directly.(次に佛心宗はただちに心性をさとり,知覚をあらはす(を)詮とす.)4He also cites fromdazhu huihai大珠慧海Therefore, learning and achieving are the teaching for deluded persons, whereas understanding nocharacteristics of mind is the principle for illumined persons.(そへに修因得果は迷人の教えなり.了心无相は覺者の宗なればなり)5)Then, after citing mazu's馬祖words as recorded in the zongiing lu宗鏡録,he continues by pointing out that concentrating on one's mind and understanding the essence ofmind are crucially important. resorting to words is unnecessary. Then he cites again fromdazhu huihai and baozhi.9.In the4 dialogue, the answerer clearly expounds his philosophy along lines similar tothe southern chan tradition ofthe tang dynasty. andno doubt, dazhu huihai in particularappears to have exerted a strong influence upon him. my own citation of the words attrib-uted to dazhu huihai comes from the jingde chuandeng lu, but we do not know for surewhich chamyu lu text (s) the answerer actually consulted.
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies4.Refusal to answernot only do we lack strong evidence supporting the fact that the kensho jobutsu-ronwas a text of the daruma school, but we also have no exact knowledge as to what the phi-losophy of the daruma school was. however, some rough ideas about this school can begained from the collected materials written about it by various scholar-monks. (ka-haSh collected33 materials which refer to daruma sehool' or dainichibo nonin')i some ofthese materials there are a few interesting fragments which have common elements withthe kensho jobusron.one of the materials is the shoko shonin-den聖光上人傳.shoko was the founder ofthe sanjo三条school of the chinzei鎮西sub-sect belonging to the pure land淨土宗tradition. Nonin (or dainichi Zenshi大日禪師)is described vividly in this book. (Shoko andNonin were contemporaty, and it is highly probable that the two men met in person.) The last partof his description of nonin goes like this:The zen master [nonin], his mouth shut and tongue tied, did not reply. he only praised [ SaintShoko], you are [like] bodhisattva manjusri. You have appeared in order to teach mel, andston.8)
(禪師閉口結舌.不答而讃曰.汝是文殊師利菩薩.為訓我而來歟云々.)9The shoko shonin-denis quite ironical about nonin's attitude towards answering ques.tions. Shoko may have actually felt that Nonin was not intelligent enough to establish andpropagate a buddhist school.Asimilar attitude is, however, hinted at in the kensho jobutsu-ron. towards the end ofthe catechism, the questioner asks foolish questions, and the answerer mnerely repeats thequestions without giving a clear reply. he only says, "tthe child of the fire god searchesire."(丙丁童子来求火)10)moreover, in the kensho jobutsu-ron, the answerer refers a fevtimes to the harmfulness oftheoretical knowledge and intellectual studies.Consequently, it is very likely that the answerer in the kensho jobutsuon isdainichibo Nonin himself and the text of the kensho iobutsu-on was redacted as the re-cord of the catechism of nonin later after he died.115.Final remarksMy examnination of the kensho jobutsun has revealed the following new facts.
The  uTapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhiStStudiessotie buctimal peauliaritis andtheanswcur'sproflseni thekernshei jottiu-yn, the tretes o eeig ones ntie andainig adhcod (. furus)171)the answerer thinks that the zen approach is totally different from the traditionateachings expounded in scriptures or scholastic treatises.2)the fundamental philosophy of the answerer is based on the southemm chan tra-dition of the tang dynasty, in particular on mazu's school. one of the mainthemes repeated by the answerer is "don't search [enlightenment] outside ofyour mind."
4)his refusal to answer is very similar to the description of dainichi zenji in theShoko shonin-den. it is very likely that the answerer in the kensho jobutsu-ronisDainichibo nonin himnself.Note
1)FUUSE(2008)2)ISHi(1991)
3)kbSZb.pp.179a15-184b6.4)kBSZb,p.1817,5)KBSZb.p.183-,6)master huihai says, "Mind is the buddha and it is needless to use this buddha to seek thebuddha. mind is the dharma and itis needless to use this dharma to seek the dhatma." baozhisays, "people and buddha are not different. The great wisdom and foolishness are not different.why do you need to seek treasures outside [your mnind]? you have your own bright beads inyour body." and again says, "since buddha and people are in a same kind, people are buddha.common people occur rationality with no reasons, persistin vacancy, and run around with wa-ver."
(恵海和尚云く《心是佛なり.佛を将て佛を求むることを用いざれ.心是法なり.法を将て法を求むることを用いらざれ〓(を)云へり.寶誌台云く《衆生と佛と殊なること无し.大智は愚と異ならず.何ぞ外に向かいて寶を求むることを〓いん.身田に尾ら明珠有り.〓又,云く《佛と衆生と一種なれば衆生即ち是世尊なり.凡夫は妄に分別を生じて尤の中に執して.迷て奔る有(る).〓)(KbSzb,p.1-67)〓akahaSHI(977)8)Translation byLanu, Florin HRISS apESE〓araSECT達磨宗"written by iSHII Shudo, unpublished. (iSHIi shudo22)nihondaruma-shu no seikaku(日本達磨宗の性格),〓nzicn hoiin tugaoka bunko kenkyu nenpo(財団法人松ケ岡文庫研究年報),16,pp.123-151)i would like to show my deep appreciatioto dr. ishili and dr. deleanu who kindly give me permission to use their translation9)zoku gunsho ruiiu(続群書類従),tokyo: heibon-sha, 9a,p.32a-b.10)kbSzb,p.198a5.11)the colophonis dated the year of Ein(永仁五年)(1298), which would be about 10vears10)knsaubpilsathe yerefeinm(水七五年)(1298), yhiiwongbetbou1ooyes
rhe japanese association of inian and buddhist studies〓eim
after nonin's death.bibiography
l cnrhiho mnanoning iheterchig oihe e s chis fhi haion sucen ihmiaion be-〓iecso,
[fiom the chinese], london. rider.m the chinese], london: riders iier creai pear, rendered ino englishTurlni kibsmsmi(古瀬珠水)(〓8)s-mno khonieh scihaha mihanem石hS集)2H性成赤論]の基本的性格に肉する一考察mseamk石山論集)4,pp.155-172.石山論集)4,pp.15-172出出に因ヲる一考奈ノinsengokuyama ronshu(仙〓,o万=井後道)oNhon damashuhha(造元の日本達準宗性pp.626-71.
〓a円(常橋秀米)(17)anicbo nomnnodanmt-sumihnyemei〓大日葉認と達準宗に関する史料)2,〓〓沢加22-7,pp.22-33,kewd) bhokoi見性成井驗),baicibo noam(大目万能】),〓,Daruma school(達磨宗)cnduaiesnden theintemaional collee fratancd buddhis smdies)
