The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesa Study on the atharvaved-parisista 5-57withSpecial Reference to the kurmavibhagaMAe.iMa miki &yano michioIntroduction
The atharvaved-parisista was published in190 and1910by bolling and negelein. al-though they originally planned to present their work in three volumes,1 the one on lexico.graphical peculiarities and the one that would have provided translations were never pub-lished.
The text had attracted much attention from the great lndologists in the nineteenth cen-tury including a. weber, M. bloomfield, and w. whitney. however, because bolling andNegelein published the critical edition, announcing that they would continue working onthe text, few indologists since then got engaged in it. oaly a few such as kohlbrugge[1938 and bosch [8 remained interested. it is noteworthy that bahulkar[12] dis-cussed the relation between the naksatrakulpa of avpar and the santikalpa, and Modak[1993]offered a summary ofthe whole text.In recent years, Peter bisschop and arlo Griffiths published translations of chapters 36(〓j46,2003)andS2,2007).Moreover. Griffths[2007]offered an edition of theorissa version of the caranavyuha comparing it with avpar49.as a result of their contin-uations, especially that of which offered a useful table summarizing the past studies〓vpar, the chapters which were still waiting for furthey studies turned out to be thosewhich contain astrological and divinatory elements, such as chapter 1 (naksatrakalpa) andChapters 5-57.Since the naksatrakalpa is still difficult to deal with, mainly due to corruption of thetext, we began examining chapters 5-57,while attempting to find clues to elucidate theNaksatrakalpa. we presented a portion of our study in thel4th world Sanskrit conferenceheld on September 1-5.20ikyoto.
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesstudy on the atharvaved-purisista-5with special reference tothe kurmavibhaga (M.mapina & m.yano)(11)1.structure of the textchapter 50of avpar is not only the beginning of a group of eight chapters concerning as-trology and divination, it is also the starting chapter of the second part of avpar. The firstpart, namely, chapters 1-49, concerns with rituals and ceremonies for the king. the seconchalf of the text, i.e., chapters 50-72,deals with omens. The omens are further divided intotwo categories: astrological (chapters 5-57)and other divinatory omens in a wider sense(chapters s-72) where chapters 66-67 deal with rituals to appease bad omens, chapter 68is on dreans, and the last chapters 69-72are on bad omens.There are some key words which help find the relative date of the text from a historicalviewpoint of indian astronomy and astrology, namely, nakyatra, graha, rahu and ketn. asYano has pointed out,) there were fhve stages of development for the meaning of the grahus besides the demons that possess children as described in medical texts, with this viewin mmind it becomes clear that there are several different chronological stages even withinthe eight consecutive chapters 5o to57,and that chapter 51 belongs to the latest stage ofthe compilation of the text because the seven grahcs are enumerated in the order of week-days. interestingly, it is only in the following chapter (chapter 52) that grahq was used inhe widest sense, even beyond the five classes proposedby Yano.2.astronomical elements inChapters50-57The contents of Chapters 5-57, referring to astronomical elements, can be summarized asfollows.
The main topic of chapter5(candrapratipadika) is on observations of the moon'shorn: how the horn is raised to the notth or south. This topic is also dealt in the later San-skrit astronomical textlike brahmagupta's brahmasphutasiddhanta as srngonnati.chapter51(Grahayuddha) deals with the war between planets. The technical temms inthis chapter are very close to those found in the brhatsamhita chapter 17. For instance, thesame words yayin(the king onexpedition) and nagura (the king staying in the city) are used inBS17.8.the terms for the four kinds of war are found in bS17.2-3although with slightvariations. it should be noted that the word grchu is used in its natrowest sense and that itis described in the order of weekday. this coiresponds to the fifth stage in Yano's classifi-cation. Thus this chapter belongs to the period after greek astrology was introduced in in-
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS2)astudy on the atharvayeda-parisista5-57with special reference to the kurmavibhaga (M. Maia & m.yano)dia, namely about a.d. 300. in this chapter ketu is not regarded as the tail of ruhu, but it isstill the ninth graha, while in chapters 52and53, ketu can be regarded as comets.chapter 52(grahasamgraha), the longest chapter among chapters 50-57,deals withgroha in its widest sense. certain grahas are the sons of a graha. The number of grahassummed upin this chapter is991which exactly agrees with the number givenin bs11.28.Varahammihira counts one thousand ketus after adding nine which are in the intermediate di-rections. also to be notedis that11ketus are counted just as ibS11.5.The graha in chapter5(Rahucara) reflects its second stage of development. oneshould note that the word svarbhonu was used in this context as the eclipse demon. it oc-curs only in this chapter of avpar.3)Chapter(ketucara) consists of only12verses.all the verses seem to have been bor-rowed from the words of bhargava.Ichapter 5(rtuketulaksana) ketus are classified according to the six seasons begin-ning with the sravana-prosthapada months, namely the rainy season. it is interesting tonote that in the later chapter64, which is outside the present context, the beginning of theyear is the cold season isira).Inchapter 56(kurmavibhaga) the twenty-seven naksatras are divided into nine trikas(triads). in later astronomical texts naksatras are counted twenty-seven and the beginningis asvini. however, in the chapter being examined, naksatra begins with k-ttika, as is theusual case with the older system of the naksatras. chapter56 will be further discussed inthe next section from a different angle.〓n the other hand, in the next chapter, ice., chapter57(mandalani ) the twenty-eightnaksatras are divided into four mandalas (groups) according to the presiding deity, agni,vavu. varuna and indra.3.AvPar56on kurmavibhagawe propose an english translation of avpar56. The sanskrit text is based on bolling andNegelein's edition, and is very corrupt and difficult to restore according to the rules ofprosody. bolling and negelein wrote that "it seems probable that the text was composedinarya meter, but the attempt to restore it to this form is too doubtful for inclusion in thisvolume'.4)keith, in his review of bolling and negelein90-10], focused his attentionto the problems with prosody and counted the number of irregular half verses of avpar.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesstudy onthe athrvaned-parisist-5with special reference tothe kurmavibhaga (m.maeina c m. yano)(13unfortunately he did not elaborate on chapter 56. what he referred to as chapter 〓56' is infact chapter 57, and he eventually skipped chapter 56. the bolling and negelein'swords quoted above apply to the verses that enumerate geographical names. we found thatthe first verse is expressed in perfect sloka meter. also in the last verse(10),the first threequarters conform to sloka meter. The second verse seems to be ina meter with four quartersof 15syllables, although the last quarter is made of 19syllables. we cannot explain theremaining verses.Beside these prosodical problems, there are grammatical peculiarities. The syntacticstructure of verses 2to10are the same. in the first part of the verse the place names areenumerated. after that, for example, verse 3 runs:" if the head (of the tortoise) is damaged, it (the triad) will give damage (to these places)'.Though all the verses end with "abhihate (or hate) 'bhihonyat", the enumerated placenames are sommetimes in nominative or accusative case, and sometimes singular compound,dual or plural.3.1.Text and Translation1.krttikarohinisaumym madhym kurmsnirdiset/
sesykyavibhage tu trikam prati vinirdiset f2.suketamithile mekalalayoy ahichattra-nagapuram kusipariyatrakurupuncalanatha kosalakausombitram pataliputramkalingapuraprthivimandalamadhye 'bhihatebhihanyot 
3. angavarigakalingamdgudhamahendra-gavasam ambasthah,bhuguh purvasamudruh sirs bhihatebhihanyotf
〓. khasabhadra samatatasamavardhamanaka-vaideha gandharahkosalatosalavenotatasajiapuramadreyatamalipta daksinapurve hatebhihamyot
One should indicate that krttika. Rohini. andMrgasiras as the center of the tortoise. oneshould indicate the rest in the divisioofnaksoatras for each triad.Saketa, mithila, mekala, alaya, ahichattra,Nagapura, Kasi, pariyatra, kuru, Pancala, asvell as kosala, kausambitira, pataliputra,〈alingapuralf the central (triad of thetortoise representing) the area of the earth isdamaged, it (the triad) will give damage (tothese places).anga, vanga, kalinga, magadha, mahendraGavasa, ambastha and those parts which havethe ocean in the east-if the head (of theortoise) is damaged, it (the triad) will givedamage (to these places).Khasa, bhadra, Samatata, Sama,Vardhamanaka, vaideha, Gandhara, kosala.Tosala, venatata, sajjapura, madreya,Tamalipta-if the right-front side (of theortoise) is damaged, it (the triad) will givedamage (to these places).
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies5. avantyako vidarbho matsya cakorg-bhimarathaavanavalayakantisimhalulankapuri civdravida barbaratira daksinaporsve hatebhihamyat 
6. sahyagirivaijayantikunikunanasikyakarmanoyamimahi /narmadabhrgukaccho daksinapascdd dhutebhihanyct
7.saurastrasindhusauviramulaugramarostrakunvitcnanartagacchayanaton pucche 'bhihatebhihanvoit
8. sorasvatoms trigarton matsyunnanvorabdihikummathurapuramgades uttarabhage hatebhihcnyotf
9.brahmavartam satadruhimavantcmatamca mcinukam
kusmiram civ tatha uttaraporsve hatebhihanyut f
10.nepulakoamarupem videhodumbaram tathatathavantyah kaikayas ca uttarapurve hatebhihanyat f
avantyaka, vidarbha, matsya, cakota,Bhimaratha, Yavana, Valaya, kanti, Simhala,Lailkapuri, dravida, barbaratira-i the right-side (of the tortoise) is damaged, it (the triad)will give damage (to these places).Sahyagiri, vaijayanti, kunkuna, Nasikya,Karmanoyami, Mahi, Narmada, bhrgukaccha-if the right back(of the tortoise) isdamaged, it (the triad) will give damage (tothese places).saurastra, Sindhu, Sauvira, malava, togetherwith ramarastraka, anarta, gaccha, and yanata-ifthe tail (of the tortoise) is damaged, it (thetriad) will give damage (to these places).Sarasvata, trigarta, Matsya, Nanvata. balhika,Mathura, puramgadesa-ifthe left back-(ofthe tortoise) is damaged, it (the triad) will givedamage (to these places)Brahmavarta, Satadru, Himavat, parvata,Mainaka, kasmira-if the left side (of thetortoise) is damaged, it (the triad) will givedamage (to these places).nepala, kamarupa, videha, udumbara,Avantya. and kaikaya-if the left-front side(of the tottoise) is damaged, it (the triad) wilgive damage (to these places).1)we read kalingapurama one nanne, because kalinga occurs in the next verse. we have separated katiagafrom prthivi2)bolling & negelein read bhma [g] ratha.3)The teading of the text uttarabhage mustincotrect, because it means "the left part". the correct reading should be uttarapascut. cf. daksinpascad in6.3.2. interpretationThe 56th chapter on the kurmavibhaga is one of the shorter chapters ofavpar. because itis too short and without any additional explanation, we find some difficulties in under-jtanding the purpose of this chapter. it describes the correspondence between the sky andthe earth through a tortoise simile.9) when a naksatra in the sky is damaged by some plan-ets, as varahamihira says i bS,  the corresponding countries or people are damaged. inorder to give this instruction, the figure of a tortoise was used. the description of the partsof the tortoise which correspond to the nine parts of the earth starts from verse 2beginningwith the central part and moving to the east, southeast, south, southwest, west, northwest,
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesastudyon the atharuaed-parisita5-57with special reference to the kurmavibhaga (m. maeia c m. yano)(15)north and northeast in the clockwise order (pradaksina).There are some texts, especially among puranas, which contain similar ideas. lewis di-vided these texts into two types: one that has a longer list and the other with a shorter list.,He referred to bS and the mforkandeyapurana as those that contain the longer list, andAvpar, the garudapurona and the vismudharmottarapuruna as those that have the shorterlist. kirfel [1920,81ff.」 compared the list of geographical names of BS with that of the〓arkandeyapurang.we compared these geographical names arranged in the nine directions. we chose vdh-Up as the representative of the shorter list, and the bS as that of the longer list. comparing these texts with avpar, we found that only the four place names were commonly men-tioned in these three texts. kuru and pancala in the center, mapadha in the east, andHimavat in the north. other than these four places, we did not find any other place namesthat lie in the same direction as described in the list of avpar and vdhup, although bothare classified as containing the shorter list.〓n the other hand, we found a greater number of similarities between the list of bS andvdhup, although they are classified in different types of the list. The similar names arefour in the center: pancala, kuru, matsya, surasena, seven in the east: vrsadhvaja, amjana,panna, Suhma, magadha, kasi, kosala, four in the southeast. kalinga, vanga, anga, Vai-darbha, only one in the south: karnataka, three in the southwest: ambastha, Strimukha,ananta, only one in the west: mleccha, three in the northwest: mandavya, tusara, mulika,two in the north: gandhara and himavat, four in the northeast. kauluta, brahmaputra.Abhisara. kasmira.10)In summary, it is clear that although the geographical list of the kutmavibhaga inavpar is classifed as the shorter one, the nine directions are quite different not only fromthe texts of the longer list, but also from that of the shorter list. it is strange that althoughmost of the place names in the kurmavibhaga ofavpar are those which are familiar to in-dologists, only the allotment is quite different from the rest of the texts. in order to knowthe origin of this peculiar list of geographical names, we will need further investigations.This listmight give some clues to the provenance ofthe text ofavpar.acknowledgemnentswe thank prof. einoo shingo for his generosity of sharing with us his valuable digi-
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies16)astudy on the atharwaved-parisista5-57with special Reference to the kurmavibhaga (m. Maejina & m. yano)talized cards. also thanks are due to dr. jeffrey-Tri Nguyen who read and improved theEnglish expression of this paper.Notes:
1)bolling & negelein[],p. vii.2)Yano [],p.381.3)this word is attested ingve-6,.4.8-9,paippalada-samhitu5,mahd.bharata328438.3.286.19,3.291.23,6.13.39,6.97347149.26,715,12.2049,and r-mayana 3.22.11. we have used e-texts of the mahabharata and ramayana digitalized by prof.Muneo tokunaga.4)bolling & negelein[1],p.374.5)keith [1912],p.765.6)especially in the later tantric texts, the image of the tortoise is developed as a yantra calledkurmacakra' . See ida [2].7)The kurmavibhaga ofavpar does not mention by what kind of beings the nakyatras ate dam-aged. ibS14.32-33,however, it is clearly stated that they are damaged by the planets",8)lewis[1967]p.85.9)we chose vdhupbecause the list of gp is very close to that ofvhup,as lewis already pre-sented. as for the longer list, the harkandeyapurana seems to have borrowed the list from bskirfel1920,p.81], although there is confusion in the west and northwest directions10)these place names follow vdhup.References
Sanskrit texts and abbreviationsAvpar. atharvaved-parisista, ed. bolling and von negelein, leipzig,1909-10.BS brhatsamhito, ed. avadha vihari, Tripathi, varanasi,1968.Gp garudapuruna, ed. venkatesvara, reprinted, nag publishers, delhi,198Vdhu vismudharmottarapurana, ed. venkatesvara, reprinted, nag publishers, delhi,1985.secondary sourcesbahulkar. shrikant Shankar, " The Naksatrakalpa and the santikalpa', proceedings of the aidi-〓orientul conference x, jaipur, 198,pp.179184.Bisschop. peter and griffiths, arlo, "The pasupata observance (atharvavedaparisista 4), indo-iramim journal, 46,2003,pp.315-348.Bisschop, peter and griffiths, arlo, 〓The practice involving the ucchusmas (atharvavedaparisista36)7,studienzur indologie und iranistik,24,2007,pp.1-46.bosch. lourens peter van den, aharvavedaparisista, chapters 〓29, introduction, translationand notes, groningen, drukkerijen bv,1978.Griffiths. arlo; 〓The ancillary literature of the paippalada school apreliminary survey with anEdition of the caranavyuhopanisad,' the atharvaveda and its paippaladasakha, ed. by arlo
The japanese association of indian and Buddhist studiesashtyonteathanoeb i wispecia reerne otlekimaybhaga (.MAyA(17Griffiths and annette schmiedchen, aachen,2007,pp.141-193.lda kaisuyuki , kimmacakramiuite' (on he development ofthe kummacakra, Ronshn sd-ies in religions east and west),33,2006,pp.79-98.cith, a.b, review of boling & negelein [1909-10],joumdl of the asiaic soce, lndon1912, pp.75-776.kinfel. w.; die kosmographie der inder, wiesbaden,190kohlbrugge, dina johamna, atharvaveda-parsisa iber omina, wageningen, h. veemman&zonen,1938.
lewis.,the shorter kumma-vibhaga text of the puranas, purana, vol.k, no.1(1967),varanasi, pp.8-97.Modak, . r., he ancilary lieratneofihe ahana-led, a s wi specia reerence totheparisistas, New delhi,1993.Yano. michio, calendr, astrology, and astonomy, blackwel companion to hinism, ed. byGavin Flood, london,2003,pp.376-392Neber, alfred, ein Atharvyaparicishta uber grahayuddha, indische sdien, vol.1,1868, pp.317-320.
(key words) aharvaveda-parisista, astonomy, astology, graha, geography, kurmavibhage(M. maejima: m.a., kyoto sangyo university)M. Yano: professor, kyoto sangyo university)
