The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesbhaviveka's view of the conventional world: an external obiec(bahyartha) anda conceptual cognition (vikalpa)TAMURa asaki
0. the purpose of this paper is to show how bhaviveka views the conventional world (vy.vahara). For this putpose, i will consider the arguments developed by him in his adhya-makahrdayakarika HK)v5-56, in which he refutes two theories constructed by theYogacara school: the theory termed asallaksananupravesopaya that the apprehension otcittamatra "mere mind' is the basis fot apprehending that there does not exist the duality ofthe grasper and the grasped (grahyagruhakadvayabhava)and the theory termed parikalpita-vabhova that the grasper and the grasped are conceptual constructs and hence unreal (pari-kabpitsvabhava)In the yogacara school, the duality in question is accepted as the conventional truth(samwrtisatya). This means that, in this school, what is accepted as the conventional truth isa conceptual construct and hence absolutely unreal. according to bhaviveka, however, it isnot tenable that what is conceptually grasped is absolutely unreal. it will be shown that hisposition necessarily follows from his view of the conventional world.1.bhaviveka begins his arguments against the asatlaksananupravesopoya-theory by say-ing the following:MHKV5svabhavato 'py ajatatvad adravyatvad vinasatch / rupodisunyam mayouad ipy abhyasadasanigita
な[thesis.] entity such as form is ernpty [of an essential nature];[reason.] because it doesnot arise as something that arises with its own nature (svabhavato jatatvat), because it is not a re-ality adravyatvat); because it is what perishes (vinasatah); [Example:] like an illusion createdby a magician. therefore, it is through repeated [nonapprehension of an essential nature] abhya-sa) that one becores free from attachnent [to such an entity]scrigita ).2attachment to a ceitain thing presupposes the conceptualization of the thing. inmHKV51bhaviveka presents an argument to prove that an entity such as form, which is be-lieved. at the conventional level, to have its oessential nature (svabhaya), does not have
The japanese association of Indian and buddhiStStudiesit at the ultimate level. Therefore, in his view, the attachment to such an entity is broken byeliminating the conceptualization of the entity's own essential nature. This elimination,which leads to the removal of the attachment to the entity, is carried out through repeatednonapprehension of the essential nature (abhyasa, sunyatadarsanabhyas).Now, according to yogacaras, by the apprehension of cittamatra, there is the non-ap-prehension of a cognized object (gruhya); by non-apprehending a cognized object, mind(grahaka) also is nonapprehended. The apprehension ofcittamatra implicates the denial ofexternal obiects (bahyortha). Therefore bhavaviveka has to say the following :MHkV52: sdbhave 'pica rupader yathabhutovabodhatah/vyaartate hy asadgrahas tadabhave〓 [read tdabhaven"in addition, even if an entity such as form exists [extemally], attachment to the nonexistent (asad-graha) is indeed removed by means ofunderstanding it as it reallyis (yathabhutavabodha). in thaase. whatis the use of assuming that there does not exist suchan entity externally?"MHkv3: maiva dyayavikupas ca cittacaitasagocarah  pratisiddhe 'pi rupadcu na pravartitumaccording to bhaviveka, form exists externally as what is dependently originated(pratityasamutpanna). Therefore, even on the assumption that there exists form externally, ifone cognizes the form in the way that one does not cognize its own essential nature, onecan get rid of the conceptualization of the essential nature. accordingly, there is no use irdenying the external existence of the form to eliminate its conceptualization.In the following verse bhaviveka adduces the reason that the yogacaras cannot arriveat the elimination of the conceptualization of form merely by resorting to the denial of itsexternal existence.arhati //
"Furthermore, [in the view of Yogacaras, ] the conceptual construction of the duality [of the grasp.er and the grasped]ayavikaipa) arises within the realm of mind (citta) and mind concomitants(caitasa). [Therefore,] even if they deny [the extemnalexistence of] entities such as formrpa),they can never argue that [there is a stage where] such aconceptual construction cannot occur."The pointis that the yogacaras can say that there does not exist an extetnal object indepen-dently of the mind, but they cannot say that there does not exist the mind. in their view, theconceptualization of form occurs within the realm of the mind.In the above manner bhaviveka has shown that the apprehension of cittamatra doesnot serve to eliminate the conceptualization of form and to remove the attachment to it. heconcludes the arguments about the yogacaras' asallaksananupravesopoya-theory by say-
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies)bhaviveka's view of the conventional world (m. tamura)ing the following:MHkv:tannirasaya ced isto vidhyantaraparigrahah /praksalanad dhi pankasya durad aspar.sanam varm
"tf you wish to adopt a different method in order to negate that [conceptual construction of the duality of the grasper and the grasped], it is indeed better to stay away frommud [in the form oftheboctrine of "mere mind' ] s as not to touch it than to wash it away."4,The asallaksanonupravesopaya-theory has difficulty in accounting for the removal of at-tachment to things in the empirical world. bhaviveka suggests that one should start withaccepting the empirical world as it is. in the empirical world everything is believed to haveits own essential nature.2.For bhaviveka, what is to be denied is the existence of an essential nature and not thaofan entity on which the essential nature is superimposed. he has to accept that with refer-ence to an external obiect a conceptual cognition arises. Therefore, he has to criticize thefollowing view set forth by the yogacaras: whatever is conceptually grasped is unrealparikalpitasvabhova). bhaviveka says the followingMHkV5:nestam bhuiagavac cdsat kalpitam kalpitatvatah*raiivatmana hyanekuntat pratitirvapi**badhiku*hoornaert [201];nesto bhuiagavac can samkalpah kalpitatvatch lindtnered.,*〓hoornaert [],api lindtner ed.)"(Yogacara) [Thesis.] whatis grasped by aconceptual cognition kopita) is nonexistent (asat)[Reason, ] because what is grasped by a conceptual cognition has the property of being conceptu-ally grasped kalpitatvatah)[Example:] like the snake [ which is grasped by aconceptual cogni-tion].
(bhaviveka) This argument is not accepted as sound. for the reason used here is inconclusiveanekanta) because of the presence of the rope [ which is existent and which has the property oeing conceptually grasped]. or, common sense (pratiti) contradicts the thesis in question.'Bhaviveka points out that the argument presented by yogacaras has hetvabhasa "fallaciousreason' and paksabhasa "fallacious thesis'. according to him, as with reference to a snakewhich does not exist externally, a conceptual cognition does occur, so, with reference to arope which exists externally, a conceptual cognition can occur. in addition, common sensecontradicts the thesis that what is conceptually grasped is nonexistent. common sense sug-ests that, with reference to arope which exists externally, the conceptual cognition "this isa rope", which is considered to be valid, occurs.
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesbhaviveka's view of the conventional world (M. tamura)(11Itis important to note that bhaviveka here distinguishes two types of conceptual cogni-〓
tion: valid and invalid. Therefore, he has to say the following:MHkVtadamsudrs ter na bhrantir anekusu hi yatah rvathurthamisedhat te syc cqvashyapavodita"indeed, [ the conceptual cognition "this is a rope' which occurs in the situation where only a ropeis present in the visual field] is not an eroneous cognition (bhrunti) since [through this cognition]one perceives the part of the rope (tadamsa). For [the object which is erroneously cognizedbhranti) [ie., the rope]]has more than one part.' and, it would follow that you commit thefault of the denial ofrealities (vastvaparadita) since you absolutely deny [the reality of ]an objectconceptually grasped]."The point is that an object of a conceptual cognition has two parts: the part which is erro-neously grasped ('khrul pa, * bhranta) and the one which is grasped as it really is yang dgpa ii lta ba bzhin,* yathabhnta). with reference to a rope that exists externally, when the con-ceptual cognition  this is a rope' occurs, this conceptual cognition is considered to cognizethe real aspect of the rope, while, when the conceptual cognition "this is a snake' occurs,this conceptual cognition is considered to cognize the unreal aspect of the rope. inBhaviveka's view, accordingly, it is proper to say that a conceptual cognition is not abso-lutely an etroneous cognition and what is grasped by a conceptual cognition is not abso.lutely nonexistent. Therefore it would follow that the Yogacaras, who absolutely deny thereality of an obiect of a conceptual cognition, commit the fault of the denial ofrealities.3.we have seen how bhaviveka refutes the yogacaras' asallaksananupravesopoy- andparikalpitasvabhava theories advocated by the yogacaras. two points are made byBhaviveka: one is that the denial of the existence of the external world does not serve toremove the attachment to the empirical world and the other is that a valid conceptual cog-nition cn occur with reference to an external obiect. it is important that, for bhaviveka,even if the validity of a conceptual cognition is demonstrated, it is assessed only at theconventional level. even if the conceptual cognition "this is a rope' with reference to a ropewhich exists externally is valid at the conventional level, this cognition cognizes the ropeas having the essential nature of being a rope.*My special thanks are due to professor brendan s. gillon for correcting my english.notes
1)see mvh6.2)MHKI18cd sunyatadarsanabhyasar klesavrttynpaghatatc
The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudies3)tj ad mHKv23b7,p2374] khyed his ioi skye bo de mid shes p〓g sks p dgl dpo kho ncr gzg phyi rol gyi yul med par btgs ps dzhig'grubpar 'gyurop4)we can find a parallel passage in the prainapradtipa.pp27,09b6-7]gzhum yang rnm par rig pa nye bar blang hyang byas nas galte /yongs su gtong bar yang 'odna ni 'di ltar dm rdab 'khru bas mi reg par thag bsring ba bzang〓ockel [198 moreover, if you think that you first accept (abhyupagama) ideation (wirnapti)then abandon it, you would do better to avoid the mud altogether than to have wash it away.5)tj ad MHKvb 214b5-7;p238a-1]ku brtgs ; bgsp' ngo bo mid de mipha rolpo dog gis brtags , btg ltar gcig tu 'khrpa nyid ma yie / gomg gi phyir zhe〓 thcgpsbrul ch mthong b bzncdd.s byb dpe de l chu ma'i ch yodpa de mthong ba'i phyir te  sno'khrul bas thag p 'i mi sbrul yin no snyam d nges pa llegs par brtags na 'di mi thagy gyi [coni. ; gyis ,om.sbrulma yino snyam duthcgpa'i ramg gi ngobo yug dgp yid dmigsi  skespa des sbrulgyi cha btang sfe/thag pa'i rang gi ngo bo'i cha mthong b'i phyir dpe l 'khrul pa dmg yang dg pa ji lta bcbzhin nyid kyi cha gnyigayodpas gcigtu 'khrulpa myid mayip'i phyir it is not the case that,as the opponents assume, what consists in being conceptually grasped ku brtgs p'i ngo bcpyid, * parikalpitasvabhova) is absolutely what is erroneously grasped 'khrul pa,* bhranta)why? because, in the instance expressed by saying just as one perceives a rope as a snake", oneperceives it, i.e., that which has more than one part. one first deteimines, through a erroneouscognition, the rope as this is a snake' and then, examining it further, determines it as "this is a ropeand not a snake" , when there arises a cognition which cognizes the rope as it really is [lit. the reasssence of the rope」, one, through this cognition, abandons the part of the snake and perceives thepart of the essence of the rope. Therefore, in the instance in which one perceives a rope as a snakethere are two parts in an object of a conceptual cognition: the part which is erroneously graspec('kh p,* bhranta) and the one which is grasped as it really is (yang dugpjibbin*yathubhnta).accordingly, what consists in being conceptually grasped is not absolutely what iserroneously grasped.'abbreviations: eckel[]bhavaviveka's critique of Yogacara philosophy inchapter xxvof the prainapradipa." i iscelanebuddhica, ed. chr. lindtner. copenhagen kademisk For-lag. hoornaert [2001]nnotated translation of madhyamakahrdayakorika/rkaivulav.55-68."Religion ad culture 13-47.Mhk: madhyamakchrdayakarika, ed. chr. lindtner,Chennai, 2001.MVbh: madhyantorvibhagabhusya, ed. g. nagao, tokyo,1974pr prainapra-dipa, d83,5253.tj. tarkaivala, d86,5256.<Key words)bhaviveka, yogacara, samprii, buhyuriha, pikopa(Graduate student, hiroshima university)
