The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSSamghabhadra on karma and Momentarinessbiia-theory and Three other metaphorsMaTSuSHIMahisakamiIntroduction
interpretations on the notion of avijnapti include whether it is the factor that links kar-ma and its effect. This interpretation might have been proposed on the ground that vasu-bandhu introduced the theory of  seeds (biia)' in his masterpiece the abhidharmakos(henceforth akbh), in order to nullify and replace sarvativada dharma, i.e., apijnapti, withit. vasubandhu denies the reality of aviinapti and states that the substance of karma is voli-tion (cetana) and that the connection between karma and its effect should be explained bythe biia-theoty, orby samtatiparinamavisesa-theory.ah has long been considered tobe the most important workiabhidhatma literature, it was natural for modern scholars tofollow vasubandhu's position, without examining other sarvativada texts carefully.To be sure, some scholars have already pointed out that the connecting function doesnbelong to avijnapti, since by definition avijnapti is terminating when a person passes away.still some scholars insist that avijnapti should be regarded as a sort of karma, as translatedeaviinapti-kurmd" chinese.Here, the proof of mnotnentariness shed light oh this matter. it is well-known that vasul-bandhu introduced the proof of momentariness ibh, which was well-argued and be-came a model forits later development. Samghabhadra adopted its style with a little modi-fication. so, the momentariness of all conditioned dharmnas was their commo1understanding.That accepted, it naturally poses a question. how can a momentary karma pruduce itseffect, for it doesn't exist when the effect is produced? The answer is found in the nyayamu-sara (henceforth na).i would like to give an answer to the long-disputed question based othe relevant portioni29pp.527-535c8).
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies1.momentary karma can not produce its effect.Nyaya-vaisesika pointed out as follows:if all conditioned dharmas are momentary. then karma ca't bring about its effect. forkarma is also momentary. they give an example of seeds, and claim that seeds producetheir sprouts at the very moment when they perish, which means that, having perished,they cannot produce them at a later time. karmas are also conditioned, and hence, they aremomentary. Since they perish without producing their effects, they can never produce theireffects, as is the case of seed perishing without producing its sprout. Moreover, once kar-mas are perished, they cannot be causes, for nonexistents cannot be causes.1-a. The seed theory ofdarstantikaprobably darstantikas pointed out that karmas cannot produce theit fruits if they aremomentary. Samghabadra reports that they insisted, in the possibly lost works, as follows:Seeds produce their fruits not directly, but after producing intermediate sprouts andbranches. Thus seeds are not the direct causes which exist iust before the fruits. still we cancall them "indirect causes, for the continuum beginning with a seed succeeds up to itsfruit. The same is true of karmas. The substance of karma. i.e. mind, doesn't cause its ef-fect directly, but the continuum of the mind continues until it produces its effect. Thereforethe mind can be called both direct and indirect causeIn this way, darstantikas distinguish " direct cause" from indirect cause", and under-stand that seeds and karmas fall into the latter category. Their metaphot, i.e., the botanicalexplanation of karma and its effect is well-known, and this " seed theory" is adopted bykosakara vasbandhu. it should be noted that the prototype of his sgmtatipcrinoncvisesctheory is found here.1-b. CriticismodarstantikaSamghabhadra criticizes the darstantika theoty of a karmic continuum on two grounds.First, this theory is argued on the ground that only present dharmas exist. Sarvastivadastandpoint is "the existence of dharmas in the three time periods", and thereby the darstan-tika theory cannot be accepted. in the first chapter of na, samghabhadra criticizes that thedarstantika notion of karmic series is not logically acceptable in the case of the definitionof aviinapti. that is, he observes that since a continuum consists of more than one parts, itcannot be real. Second. even though the continuum is accepted, the continuum of mind is
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesdifferent from that of seed. because the mind loses its function in the state of mindlessness.ifkarma is. as darstantika insists. the mind in reality there should be a break in the streamof the mind. and a non-buddhist school's criticism of the darstantika position would beiustifiable.
Sarvastivada explains karma as vipaka-hetu. karma and its effect is also explainedwith karmic cause (vipuka-hetu) and karmic effect (vipaka-phala).as this karmic cause remains even when the continuum of mind is broken off, namely in the state of mindlessnessetc., so does prapti. From the standpoint of the existence of dharmas in the three time periods,past dharmas have lost their function, but not their capacity(功能*samarthya), and therebyit is still possible to produce their effects later. Samghabhadra distinguishes capacity frontunction, and says that the capacity of past karma could produce its effect.2.onthe problem that a performer of a action and a receiver ofits effect aredifferent.
Nyaya-vaisesika' s counter-argument:Even though the previous explanation is accepted, since the performer is momentary,the receiver ofthe effect would be different frorn the performmer.Samghabhadra points out that this argument occurs because the opponent doesn"t un-derstand the neaning of the word e different". according to samghabhadra, there are twcmeanings of the word edifferent". one meaning is continuumand continuum b at thesame moment are different. The other meaning is continuumat moment l and continuumAat moment 2are different. From the standpoint of momentariness, " different" is used inthe second sense. on that ground, it is reasonable to say that the same continuum receivesthe effect. to show this, he introduces three metaphors.Metaphor1, rice and barleysometimes cause and effect are connected, and somnetimnes they aren't. [if it is as you say, ] then itis as ifexpecting the sprouts ofrice and barley from the seeds ofrice.opponent] how is it so?[Samghabhadra] These two seeds are the same in the sence that they ate both different from thesprouts. That is, when you expect the sprouts of nice and barley will be produced from the seed ofrice, the same [kind, i.e. the sprout of rice] is connected, but [the sprout of barley is] not connect-ed. if you expect the sprouts ofrice and barley will be produced fromn the seed ofrice, these sprouts
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesare the same in the sence that both are entities different from the seed of rice. still if you expect thesprout of rice [ from the seed of rice], cause and effect are connected, but if you expect the sproutof barley [from the seed ofrice], they are not connnectedby this metaphor, he shows that continuumat the moment l and at the moment 2areconnected. but this is not the case for continuumaand b.Next, as an example of one and the same continuum (person), Samghabhadra speaks ofa fre.
Metaphor 2,the fire burning downa villageltis like continuity of fire burning a village. a man attempted to burn another village. he ignited apart of a barn, then the fire went on burning until the whole village was burnt down to be ashes. avillager arrested the man, whipped him and forced him to compensate. the man made an excuseand said. "i burned iust a building with a small fire. [Since fire is momentary] my fire has goneout. So, I have only to compensate just a handful of grass." he atoned like this. how could he beinnocent? wisemen would understand that the fire which burnt the whole village was producedcontinuously from the fire the man ignited. Therefore, the man is guilty of burning the whole vil-lage.
The point is clear from the metaphor. The direct action of the performer is only igni-tion, but the result, bumning down of the entire village is also caused by the fire. so the manis responsible for everything the fire burnt down, even though the fire is momentary, too.As for skandhas which produce effect after the first and direct skandhas vanished, weshould understand that they are the same as the case of the perished seed or fire.Metaphor3,The taste of aripening fruitMoreover, it is well-known that the taste of citric acid is produced when the fruit ripens after a se-ries of changing, even then there is no cause of acid.atthe end of the controversy, Samghabhadra gives an example of a fruit endowed withcitric acid. even though it doesn't have the taste before ripening, the ripened fruit owns asour taste. in the same way, an effect doesn't have a visible cause, but the karma still existsin the past time period, and can produce the ffruit. There is no difficulty of explaining theconnection between karma and its effect, though we accept mmomentariness.
The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudiesconclusion
if we accept that all conditioned dharmas are momentary, then it is natural to raise aquestion, "how can a karma produce its fruits, for karma vanishes immediately?"to thisquestion, darstantikas answered with the metaphor of seed and fruit or the theory of streamofthe mind-continuum which was inherited by vasubandhu. Samghabhadra criticized theirtheoty, and his main point was that mental activities cease when one is in the mindlessmeditation. he also adopted the metaphor of seed and fruit. but its basis was Sarvastivada'stheoretical pivot point, the existence of dharmas in the three time periods. according totheir thought, even a past karma really exists: it loses its function but still possesses capaci-ey to produce its fruit.As for the problemn that a petformer and a receiver would be different if all conditioneddharmnas are mnomentary, Samghabhadra explains that there are two meanings of difference.aperson can be said to be different at two different moments, but we don"t think there atetwo different persons. So it is reasonable that the performer of a karma receive the effect ata different moment. as for the cases in which we do not see direct and visible causes, hegives an example of fire or of citric acid, and explains that there are indirect causes everthey are invisible. here, Samghabadra gives three " cotrect" drstantas to criticize darstanti-kas.
speaking of avijapti, its function is not stated here. he explains its function by meansof propti or the capacity of past dharmas. That means, we'd better not attribute the functiorof connecting karma and its effectto anijnapti.References and notes are omitted(key words) sanghabhadra, vasubandhu, ksanika, aviinapti(Graduate student, Ryukoku university)
