The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesThe acquittal (anapatti) of the mentally disorderedMonks
KoikE kiyoyuki1.Introductionwhen the monk of the sangha transgressed against the monastic law (vinaya-pitaka),and was therefore identified as the mentally disordered (ummattaka)at the assembly ofmonks (ummattakasammuti), in most cases he was certified "not guilty' (anapatti) of histransgressions. This acquittal of transgression for ummmattaka and khittacitta (one whosemind is thrown over) is likewise applicable to the most serious punishment such as paraiikawhich would normally result in lifelong expulsion from the sangha, in each vinaya schools.The mentally disordered monk who has been certified as such and therefore acquittedis deprived of his monkhood by the sangha. however, he is not purged from the sangha.afterward, if he himself offers to return to the sangha and when he is admitted and certi-fied that he is not mad (insane) anymore at the assembly of amulhavinava, he is atoned forhis past transgressions. Therefore he can regain his monkhood.why the sangha established such a system for the mentally disordered monk similar tcthe mnodein system of rehabilitatio? first of all, we need to know how they understand themental disorders. also, how they treated the mentally disordered who were prone to be ex-cluded from the community. analyzing this system of how to treat the mentally disorderedin the saigha leads us to elucidate the ethics of the vinaya pitaka i. e. buddhist ethics. Thewriter examnined the pali and the corresponding chinese tripitaka.2.The acquittal (anapatti) ofthe mentally disordered monksThere are many kinds of acquittal of offences within the vinaya pitaka, most of themare minor offences relating to daily life such as dukkata : teflection or confession to amonk. however, even in the mnost serious offences i.e. paraiika, the 〓legally insane' of thementally disordered, the first offender, of one who is in ignorance of meaning of the fac4
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesThe acquittal (anapatti) of the Mentally disordered Monks(k. koike)(:and one who has no intention are judged not guilty. Followings are the precepts that oneshould not kill living-things in each vinaya schools.anapatti asancicca ajanantassa na maranadhippayassa ummattakassa adikammikassa' ti (Thera-vada)2)
Acquittal is given to a first offender, or to one who is insane or suffers intolerable painfrom diseases (dharmaguptaka3) , mula-sarvastivadin4).acquittal is given to someone who is insane (Mahasaiighika)).How did early buddhism evolve the concept ofummattaka? early buddhist texts de-scribed a brahman lady vasitthi who lost her sons, as the typified case of ummattaka.とaihicted by grief for my son, with my mind deranged, out of my senses, naked, and with dishev-eled hair. i wandered here and there. i dwelt on tubbish heaps in the streets, in a cemetery, and onhighways. i wandered for three years, consigned to hunger and thirst. (Theri.133-34)Next case is a householder who grieved for his beloved only son."now on that occasion, a certain householder's dear and beloved only son had died. after his son'sdeath, he had no more desire to work or to eat. he kept going to the charnel ground and crying:"My only son, where are you? y only son, where ate you?"cOther typified cases of the insane who transgressed against the precepts of the vinayasare as follows:"now at that time the monk gagga was mad, out of his mind, and while he was mad, out of hismind he perpetrated much and spoke in a way that was not worthy ofa recluse."9)(vin.ii,80)."The monk nanda was mad, out of his mind, he perpetrated much and spoke in a way that was notworthy of a monk. sometimes he attended at the convention (kamma, uposatha), and often he wasbsent from them. (Dharmaguptaka)"10vasitthi was discussed iabhidhamma texts1,especially about the five causalities ofmental disorders. i suggest that the state of vasitthi was one of chronic psychosis (severemental disorders). however, the texts describe the brahman lady as suffering froma reactivepsychosis caused by bereavement.The householder appears to have become depressiveor melancholy after he was bereaved from his only son. according to the texts, these twocases are representative of people's sufferings (dukkha),that is "piyehi vippayogo dukkho'(the suffering of being separated from those whom one loves), one of the eight maior sufferings.These descriptions show us how buddhism coped with the dukkha especially who have ex-perienced the suffering of people causedby bereavement
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesthe acquittal (anapatti) ofthe mentally disordered monks (k. koiIKE)The vinaya pitaka illustrated ummattaka, khittacitta, and vedanatta as the cases worthyof an acquittal of ummattaka. regarding ummattaka, the text interpreted five causalitiesthose which are : loss of parents, loss of property, disharmony of the four great elements(maha-bhutani), being persecuted with amanussa (non-human beings, yakkha, local natural di-vinities) and kamma (the preexistent action)).This is roughly similar to pathogenesis inmodern terminology, that is, grief14caused by bereavement (psychogenesis), economics,somatic disease (somatogenesis), possession or hallucination ofnon-hunan beings (psycho-sis) and a stubborn disease (or an incurable disease, the so-called kamma-disease).Regarding khittacitta, the text explained five causalities such as: dread of amanussa,being beaten by amanussa, being bled of energy by amanussa, disharmony of the four greatelements and kamma. The text also emphasized causality of amanussa in khittacitta. re-garding vedanatta, afnicted by pain, was said to be caused by somatic disease such as winddisease, fever disease, cold disease. complications of these three kinds of diseases. and sea.sonal disease1). vedanatta is seems to be intolerable pain caused by a serious illnessumnmattaka or khittacitta is not always an acquittal. if a monk is conscious of commit-ting parajika, he comnmits parajika. also if "a mad monk intentionally tries to murdersomeone, and this man dies, the monk violates parajika. butif the person does not die, themonk violates thullaccaya."1b) buddhism always emphasizes manaskamma or intention,as it is written as, "to purify one's mind, that is the teaching of (all ) the awakened. (dhp.83)1). under the modern japanese criminal law, the mentally disordered are not alwaysincompetent. however, if sotineone is judged as incompetent in court, he inay receive anacquittal based on that fact. likewise, the inodern crisninal law does not impose the firstoffender if the law is not yet legislated at the time of committing the crimel9).3.ummattakasammuti, amulhavinaya and RehabilitationMonks adomonished each other not to transgress the rules of the vinaya. ifa monkspoke irrelevantly or behaved unworthy of a monk: therefore, transgressed the rules andduties of the sangha, this monk was reproved by other monks. after he was certified as in-sane at the ummattakasammuti, he was not guilty (acquittal). however, instead of an ac-quittal, his monkhood was deprived and then he was putongood behaviour".when he recovered from his illness and he applies himself to the sangha for rehabilita-tion, monks of the sangha assemble the amulhavinaya. at the assembly i.e. the amulhavi-
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesthe acauittal (anapatti ) of the mentally disordered monks(k. koikE)(〓naya, the monk would confess that he did not remember that he had committed an offenceand that now he had recovered his insanity. Some monks would then reprove him for hispast offence. however, to re-admit the monk, as he was no longer insane at the amulhavi-naya was not necessarily decided only by a majority of the sangha. by virtue of remarks ofsome modest monks, he could finally be judged as amulha ( not insane) and so he wasatoned for his past transgressions. Remarks from sensible, modest monks of few wantswere stressed at the amnulhavinaya. Thus his monkhood was accepted by the sangha.concerning an acquittal of the insane, there is a rough similarity between the vinayeand the modern criminal law in which the incompetent mentally disordered are found noguilty, as above mentioned. however, the difference is atonement of the past transgres-sions in the vinaya. These disciplinary features of the vinaya are necessary for the monkswho are striving to attain enlightenment. incidentally, ancient hindu law, such as the mampresumed the mentally disordered criminal to have diminished responsibility. it is notecthat punishment was not so cruel, as was followed by atonement in ancient india).Now, regarding depriving of their monkhood of the mentally disordered monks at theassembly, and their later rehabilitation, i would compare this with the modem thinking ofrehabilitation medicine for the disabled. Therefore, why did the vinaya allow an acquittalof the insane? The following is my view. The sangha would have been stocked with medi-cal, psychiatrical and legal knowledge about the mentally disordered. and also buddhistfundamental principles such as the doctrine of dependent origination and compassionwould support this view.1)mental disorders, mental illness, or psychiatric diseases.狂,顛狂,癡狂inchinese transla-t1o.
2)vin. iii,78. "There is no offence if it was unintentional, if he did not know, if he were noneaning death, if he was out of his mind, a beginner.", horner, i. b. (trans.) the book of thepiscipline, i,136,1938,pTs.3)sifen u四分律,t22,577b:不犯者.最初未制戒.癡狂心亂痛惱所纏不犯.4)genben shuoyiqieyoubu pinaiye根本説一切有部毘奈耶,t23,668c:又無犯者.最初未制戒癡狂心亂痛惱所纏.
5)nohe sengzhi lu摩詞僧祇律,t22,257c:不犯者狂癡心亂無罪.6)ther-d theri-gotha,1883; read., 1966,pts, z aham雑阿含,t2,317b-318a, bieyi zaham別譯雑阿含,t2,405b-c.7)pnuitt, w. (trans.) the commentary o the verses ofthe therigatha.1988.pTs.〓

The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesthe acquittal (anapatti) of the Mentally disordered monks(k. koike)〓)〓eの
11)〓 piposha lun大毘婆沙論,t27,65-c, xiczog lun顕宗論,t29,877a-b; jushe lun倶8)bikkhu Nanamoli & bikkhu bodhi (trans.) The uiddle length discourses of the buddhap.718,1995, wisdom, aijhima vikoy87,zhong aham中阿含t2,800c-802a.9)homner, i. b. (trans.), the book ofthe discipline, v,105,1952,PTS.10)sifenu四分律,t22,14-c舎論T29,82c-83a.12)"bereavement is the temm used to denote the obiective situation of having lost someone signif-icant through death. (omission) grief is the teimn applied to the primarily emotional (affective) re-action to the loss of a loved one through death." Stroebe, m. S. hansson, r.o. et al., handbookof bereavemenf,45208,ameri. psychol. assoc.13)sapoduobu pini modleleqie薩婆多部毘尼摩得勒伽,t23,582c.14)koike, k.," buddhism's Stance towards bereaved people especially the mentally disordered-modern Japanese culture coping with death and bereavement-journalofpali ad bud-dhist studies,23(forthcoming).15)shisonglu十誦律,t23,42-c.16)shisong十誦律,t23,436c.17)tatsuguchi, m. "observance of precepts and manaskamma, on anapatti" yuishiki shiso nokenkyu, pp.33-41,1987, hyakkaenjapanese).18)max muller, F. (trans.) the dhammapadd,181, clarendon.19)nagai, S., ueda, T. & oo, s. bukk shiso taikei 〓,1932, daito shuppanjapanese).20)Shirai, S. kodai indo no keiho shiso,1985, hakuiunsha (i japanese)<key words) anapatti, ummattaka, umnattakasammuti, amulhavinaya, rehabilitationpsychiatrist, kyoto sogo welfare association, d. litt.)
