The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSDebates on the concept of dharmanihsvabhova inDharmapala's viinaptimatratosiddhiratnasambhavaNAU Ensho
Introduction
In this paper, i discuss vijnanavadin's understanding of the concept of dharmanihsv-abhoua by examining dharmapala's vijnaptimatratasiddhiratnasambhava(hereafter vm.SRS),a commentary to the vimsatikourtti, particularly focusing on his doctrinal debateswithabhidharma and madhyamika scholars. The concept of dharmamihsvabhovg (on-ex-istence of self-nature in dharmas), or dharmnanairutmyselflessness of dharmas), is a distinc-tively mahayana doctrinal concept developed to understand the theory of no-self (anatman)in contrast with that of abhidharma buddhism which only admits pdgalanairatmy (self-less of persons). While debating with abhidharma and madhyamika scholars, in the vM-SRS, dharmapala introduces a vijnanavadin interpretation of the concept of dharmanihsvabhava based on the theoty of mind-only viinqptimatrata ), i.e., that there are no externalchcrmcs elements) other than viinanc (or vijnapti [mind]).1.abhidharmika critique of the mahayana Theory of dharmanihsvabhoyaand dharmapala's answerIn the vmSRS(90.a.26-27),the debate over the concept of dharmanihsvabhava beginswithaabhidharma scholar's critique against dharmapala. The abhidharma positionstates that the buddhist concept of the twelve bases of existence (ayatana) is the buddha'sskillful means for explaining the concept of pudgalanaridtmya .4-26).dharmapala re-sponds that the abhidharmika's criticism is not valid because he does not take into accountthe mahayana concept of dharmanihsvabhaua. The true intention of the buddha, accordingto dharmapala, is that dharmas, such as rupa, etc., are mihsvabhoon-existence of self-na-ture)(90.a.27-29).Dharmapala continues that although dharms suchas rupa, etc., manifest as if they are
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS114) debates on the concept of dharmanihsvabhaua in dharmapala's vinaptimatratasiddhiratnasambhava (. nasu)real external existences, ultimately they are phenomenal manifestations of wiinana, andthese dtharmas are in reality nihsvabhavab.2-4).svabhova of all vcstus can be mani-fested through the workings of one's own winana. all perceptible vastus cannot be cognizable without viinana. viinana is the only real existence, and all phenomenal manifesta-tions arise out of viinana 9.4-6). therefore, according to dharmapala, all externaldharmas are nihsvabhova, and when we understand this we can realize the principle ofdharmanihsvabhava.b.6-8).in this section, dharmapala is trying to convince the ab-hidharma scholar of the necessity of the concept of dharmanihsvabhava based on themind-only theory of the viinanavada.〓.a madhyamika's critique of the viinanavada interpretation of the con-cept of dharmamihsvabhov and dharmapala's answerFollowing dharmapala's answer to the abhidharmikas, a madhyamika scholar presents his criticisms of the viinanavada interpretation of the concept of dharmanihsvabhaygThe Madhyamika scholar argues that we must understand dharmanihsvabhova from theperspective of ultimate reality (paramarthasatya). The realm of our external observation isnothing but confusions caused by ignorance. from the perspective ofultimate reality, how-ever, the original nature (svabhava) of all dharmas is empty unya)(90.b.9-10).althouglhe admits the concept of dharmanihsvabhava as a mahayanist, the madhyamika scholarmaintains that the concept of dharmanihsvabhova can be better understood by applying theMadhyamika theory of the two truths of paramarthcstya (ultimate truth) and samvrtisatyc(mundane truth). dharmas are empty inparcmorthasatyc, yet, the sarne dharms exist ex-ternally in samtvrtisatya. svabhava of dhhcrmcs exists conventionally like phantoms in s-rtisatya, but ultimately these svabhaya of dharmas are non-existent (or empty) inparam-urthcsysee, ui1963,p743.Dhatmapala allows that the madhyamika scholar's argument-that if there were ncexternal obiects to be seen, there could not be viinana to see them-i in accordance withthe madhvamika theory that admits nihsvabhoof all dharmas only in paramorthasaty(90.b.10-11).as a vinanavadin, however, dharmapala does not agree with this Madhy-amika theory. ui hakuju, in his study on the vMSRS, explains that dharmapala under-stands that viinana exists in paramurthasatya, but dharmas do not exist in samvrtisatya.although parikalpitasvabhava (self-nature produced from conceptual construction) in smvrti-
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesdebates onthe concept of dharmanihsvabhamain dharmapala's yinaptimatratasiddhiratnasambhava (.nasu)(115)satya is to be abandoned, the existence of viinana in paratantrasvabhoua (self-nature arisingdependent ofconditions) continues to exist. Therefore, the Madhyamika's theoty, which doesnot recognize the existence of viinanain paratantrasvabhava, is notacceptableto dharma-pala (see ui1963,p.43).according to ui, the viinanavadins maintained that citta (mind) and caitta ( functions ofmind), and objects which are known by mind, all exist as paratantrasvabhaua, but confu-sions caused by ignorance arise by the manifestation of parikalpitasvabhava, that is, falsecharacteristics of existence. the madhyamikas, on the other hand, understood that from theperspective of ultimate truth (paramarthasatya) there is no confusion and did not admit theexistence of paratuntrcsvabhoya. Therefore, dharmapala maintained that the madhyanni-ka's standpoint was invalid because only virnung exists ui1963,p.743,90.b.1-17).3.the abhidharmika's view of svabhora. further criticisms of the madhyamika Scholar, and dharmapala's answersconcerning the issue of the fundamental existence of dharmus, the abhidharma scholasays that svabhav (self-nature) does exist in svarupa (self-form)(90.b.19-20).dharmapaladisagrees, saying that svabhav karana) cannot produce actions by itself. it needs otheronditions (pratyaya).it is also not logical to say that one is heldby oneself (9b.21-22).according to vijnanavada theory, objects of the external world are manifested out of viin-una. in return, mnanifested obiects plant the vascng or biia [ seeds])in viinona. There is arcciprocal causal relationship between the extetnal phenoimena and viinana. external dthar.〓cs are nihsvabhovg, and their existence depends on the viinana (see ui1963,p.745.The madhyamika scholar raises a critical question to dharmapala. if all phenomenalexistences were non-existent, all dlharmas would be nairutmyu and nihsvcbhava. in thatcase, because vijnang is one of the dharmcs, the nature of viinuna would also be non-exis-tent. thus it wouldnot be possible to establish the existence of wiinana b.23-27).dharmapala answers that, although the vijnanavadin posits that all dharmas are non-xistent, he also accepts dharmas as prajnapti-sat (temporary existences). Even though thereis no svarupa (svabhova) in these dharmas, we cannot say they are completely non-exis-tent. for instance, there is no svarupain pudgat (self) and samtana (continuity) when anominal self moves from one gati (realm of existence) to another gati in the six gatis (90.b.27-28).

The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies116)debates on the concept of charmanihsvabhang in dhamapala's yinaptimatratasiddhiratnasambhaya (.Nasu)The madhyamika scholar is not satisfied with this answer. he contends that the naturof the sattua sentient being) who moves from one gati to another is completely non-exis-tent. when we say all dharmas are nihsvabhava, vijnana must also be completely nihsvab-havd and non-existent (90b.28-90.c.2).dharmapala maintains that through the non-exis-tence of pudgal (self), ultimately we can realize the truth of dharmanihsvabhava. butsuch a process should be admitted as upoyakausalya (skillful means) generally c.2-3).The madhyamika scholar does not concede and asks dharmapala, "in that case, whydo you need to prove the pudgalanairotmya by using the concept of the twelve dyatanathat is a skillful means?"(90.c.3-4)dharmapala answers that, according to the viinanavadatheory, dharmanihsvabhova does not mean that all dhormas are conpletely non-existent.dharmas arising by pratyaya are nairatmya and yet they are existent like a nominal selfand the nairatmya of the samtana and pancaskandhac.5-8).according to ui, the mad-hyamaka understands that dharmas that appear due to causes (hetu) and conditions (prapya-ya) are suy (empty).on the other hand, the viinanavadin disagrees with the Madhyama-ka and says that dlharmcs that appear due to causes ahd conditions are existent.The Madhyamika scholar demands that dharmapala explain the viinanavada's defini-tions of nairatmya and nihsvabhayac.8-9).dharmapala answers that, although anot-〓nno-self) is pudgalanihisvabhava, the viinanavadin does not understand that svabhavaof all dhnarmas are completely non-existent. all dharmas, such as rupa, etc. are partiallynihsvabhava, but not completely non-existent. if dtharmas were completely non-existent,we could not call them hihsvabhova. Those dtharmcs are non-existent as substances, bu1are existent as things that appear due to conditions(90.9-13)。4.dharmapala's Interpretation of the dharmanihsvabhava and his answertcthe madhyamika ScholarThe Madhyamika scholar, however, insists that dharmapala must admit that all dhar-mas, in principle, do not exist (9.c.13).dharmapala explains him that dharmanhisvabhovadoes not mean that all dharmas do not exist. it means that dharmas are milsvabhavq asthey are in the state of parikalpitasvabhova. but this does not mean that there are no ddhar-〓as at all. he explains attachnent as being illusory and brought about by feversed viewsbased onignorance (avidya). when seeds (biia) ripen in the mind, they grow in accordancewith the conditions they encounter, and various characteristics are manifested depending
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesdebates on the concept of dharmamihsvabhauain dharnapala's vijnaptimatratasiddhiratnsambhaya (e. Nasu)(117)o various conditions they encounter while developing. because of this, we give rise to ourattachments and believe that there are svabhova in the objects of the external world. Theobiects of these constantly arising attachments are called vastu (things [to be attached to])(90.c.13-20).The madhyamika scholar continues his criticism by saying, "if there are no dharmgfor these attachments, how can you call these things attachments, which has no existencesto attach to?"90.c.13-22)dharmapala answers that attachments are illusory and producedby reversed views, and they appear nominally without substantial existences. on the otherhand, if there were real existences with real svabhova as the obiect to be attached to, the)would not be attachments produced by blind passions. meanwhile, objects that are not realexistences in the external world but manifest from viynana all become subiects that carproduce attachments. when these obiects manifested fron virnona become obiects of cog.nition, they can be attached to. however, the viinana which is to be attached is nihsvabhd.va and there is only alayaviinana as the svabhava for all viinana, which is the viinapti-mutrato. ultimatelv. obiects in the external world are productions of alayaviinuna. theeighteen elements (dhatu) of the external world cannot be grasped. but the svabhava of viy-ncnas (i.e. dlayavijinona) that produce cognitive obiects are not non-existent (923-91.a.2).dharmapala continues elaborating his doctrinal position that viinaptimotrata is notmerely a theory ofnegation of rupa. nor does viinaptimatrata admit a viinana that has another vinana as an object of cognition. if another wiinana could exist as an object of cogni-tion for a viinana, it would go against the theory that wiincna is admitted as the only sub-lect. The svabhavya of obiects is, however, indescribable when it is separated from theviinana as the only subiect. Such realm is the realm of all buddhas and bhagavats(91.a.2-6).
dharmapala concludes his response to the madhyamika scholar by stating that the ex-istence of citta and caitta transcends conventional linguistic expressions. but he maintainsthat all dtharmas are not non-existent that is not empty unya). The right cause for themanifestation of all dharmas is viinanas and such viinanas exist by penetrating hindrancescrcated by the net of false distinctions (vikalpas)(91.a.6-11).Conclusion
In the vmSRS, dharmapala demonstrates his understanding of the concept of dhar-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies118)debates on the conceptof dharmamihsvabhayain dhammapala's vinaptimatratasiddhiratnasambhava (. nasu)manihsvabhava based on the viinanavadin theory that there are no external dharmas otherthan viinana (of viinapti ) through debates with opponents who claim the real existence ofall dharmas abhicharmika theory) or the complete non-existence of all dharmas (madhy-amika theory).dharmapala does not introduce any new doctrinal theoryin the vmSRS to counter hisopponents. Rather, he tries to demonstrate that the viinanavada interpretation of the con-cept of dharmanoiratmya can provide a better solution to understand the foundation of allphenomenal existences, without either simply accepting or negating the existence of alldharmas, by admitting the existence of svabhova of mind (viinana).Notes: 1)The Sanskrit title is ui hakuju's reconstruction(ui1963,p.607).currently, the onlyxtant version of this text is the chengweishi baoxing lun成唯識宝性論,a chinese translation byYiiing義浄(taisho 31,no.1591).all references (page and line numbers) to the vmSRS are basecon the edition of this text available in taisho 31.I also consulted a Japanese translation of the textin the kokuyaku issaikyo, indo seniuisubu, yugabu, vol.7works cited
Chengweishi baoxing lun成唯識宝性論.taisho31,no.1591.Jjoyuishiki hoshoron. in kokuyaku issaikyo, indo seniuisubu, yugabu 7. tokyo: daito shuppansha,1935.
Uihakuiu [u195a].shipaku faisho yuishikinijuron kenkyu. tokyo. iwanami Shoten,1953.-ui19].joyuishiki hoshoron kenkyu." vago dcigaku bungukubu kenkyuronshu6(1953).
-[ui16joynishiki hoshorom kenkyu.io butten kenkyu. tokyo: iwanamiShoten,1963.
<Key words> viinaptimatratasiddhiratnasambhava, dharmanairatmya, dharmanihsvabhava.dharnapala.
(associated researcher. institute of buddhist cultural Studies, Ryukoku university, ph.d.)
