The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesdefilement (klesa) originating from erroneous Judgmentayonisomanasikara) according to the Mahayana SutrasMryazki Tensho1.Introductiondyonisomanasikara, a terminology peculiar to buddhist literature, is attested in the contex1of the arising of defilements in the nikoyas1, and yonisomanasikara, its antonym, is usedin later times to refer to an important practice in sone texts of the viinaptimctrcvacin. Theexplanation that kles originates fro ayonisomunasikur appears in the ratnagotravi-bhagg),as pointed out by takasaki [198.prof. Takasaki has revealed that theexplanation was originally taken from the* Gaganaganiapariprccha gagp) and theJjnanalokalamkar a), and that similar explanations are found in the*dharani-svararaiasntra h), the *aksayamatinirde) and the* bodhisattvapitak dp).Based on prof. takasaki's work, Sasaki [1991])has classified the explanation found irthe rGvinto two types: one where klesa originates directly fromayonisomanasikora ancthe other where avidya precedes ay'onisomanasikura in the context of the twelvefoldInterdependent origination (pratityasamupada). in addition, prof. Sasaki has indicated thatthe origin of these two types goes back to the abhidharma literature and the agama of theSarvastivadin, respectively. The first type, as found in the ggpin the rgv, derivecoriginally from the*bhidharmaprakarana(阿毘達磨品類足論)and was succeeded bythe* mahovibhosasostra(大毘婆沙論)and the dbhidharmakosabhosya. The second type,which appears in the jacited in the Rgv, the aksn and the bdp, derived from thesahetusapratyayasanidanasutra4, which was compiled by the sarvastivacin and appearin other treatise (sastras) of the sarvastivuciin and the viinaptimatravadin.Basedoprof. Sasaki's classification, i will explore some of the mahayana sutras re-ferring to the explanation of klesa originating fromayonisomanasikaru. These sutras havenothing to do with the Tathagatagarbha theory orthe rgv. The main aim of this paper is toshed light on the relationship between the Mahayana sutras and the works of the sarvasti-vacin and the viinaptimatravadin, an issue which was not solvedin Sasaki [1991].
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesdefilement (klesa) originating from erroneous Judgment (ayonisomanasikara)('according to the mahayana sutras (T. miyazaki,2. klesa originating directly fromayonisomanasikoraAs examined by takaski [188] and Sasaki [1991],the rgvbases the understanding thatklesa originates directly from ayonisomanasikura on the accounts attested in the ggp5In all three extant versions of the gogp, we find almost the same explanation.In addition to examining the sources of this understanding, i add here an account of the*visesacintibrahmapariprccha vbrahp).it is clear that the three later versions of theVbrchp contain similar expressions of the explanation, although in the oldest translationby dharmaraksa,持心梵天所問經(tno.585), the expression is rather ambiguous:假使思惟順如應者,凡夫愚〓言發塵勞,心之本淨無能汚處。以無能汚,是故名曰本末清浄。設不染汚故,曰本淨是故解脱,爲解脱也(t15.23-6)The phrase〓思惟順如應'seems to correspond to*yonisomanusikura, but, since its coun-terpatt in the other versions uses'onisomanasikara, this might be a mistranslation wherethe translator overlooked the negative prefixa-of ayonisomanasikura.Itis noteworthy that this explanation appears in both the gagp and vbrahpin the con-textof elucidating the innate purity of mind. This raises the possibility that there was some〓集果水本體能交得無能持-張。以無能汚,是故名日本末connection between these two works.3.ignorance (aidya) originating fromayonisomanasikorain connection withthe twelvefoldpratityasamutpddThe rgvtakes from the 〓a the explanation that avidya originates from ayonisomanasi-kara, and this understanding is also found in the dhr, the aksn and the bdp, as takasaki[1988] and Sasaki [1991]pointed out.Ja In the three extant versions of the ja, including the newly found Sanskrit textthe explanation appears as one of the sixteen modes of the buddha's Enlightenment(菩提一六相)9).however, the chinese translation by *samgabhara(僧伽婆羅),度一切諸佛境界智嚴經(tno.358), which seems to preserve an earlier fo,has a different explanation.
文殊師利1無生滅者不起心意識,不思惟分別。若有分別,則成無明。不起此無明則無十二因縁(t12.252c19-21)The underlined sentence means: "if you have a false notion(*vikapa/* parikapa), ignorance(*aidya) arises." in the parallel part in the other versions, however, *aponisomanasikaraappears instead of*vikalpa/* parikalpa.
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiststudies8)defilement (klesa) originating from erroneous judgment (ayonisomanasikara)〓ccording to the mahayana sutras (T. MyazakI)〓hRThe 〓 contains two examples of a similar explanation. both examples carbeen found in all the extant versiohs of the dhr. including the oldest chinese translationby dharmaraksa,大哀經(tno.398),as quoted below.〓a]其内淨者被無想念已,無想念除於顛倒。唯念柔順不住無明。已不住無明,則不復住十二有數。已能不住十二有數,則無所生。(T134246-9)[b]謂縁報?何謂事業?從不順11)念而致縁報,從無明事,衆生之類而致欲塵。從無明事而致行矣。…不順12)念報應因縁生明慧事業無明行及其所造作。(T13.4301-c8Example [a describes one of the sixteen modes of the buddha's enlightenment. whichcorresponds to the descriptions in the jiaand the btp.ks The explanation is found in the later two extant versions of the aksv. but theoldest chinese translation by dharmaraksa,阿差末菩薩經(tno.403), does not have thisaccount13).
ebdp in all the three existing versions of the bdp, i find four examples of a similar ex-planatioThe fourth example in the bdp illustrates one of the sixteen modes of theBuddha's Enlightenment, as appears in the ia and the dhr.In addition to these four texts mentioned in previous studies, i will mention here threeother mahayana sutras that refer to the understanding: the lokottaraparivartp,theratnakarandasutra (r) and the bodhisattvagocaropoyavisayavikurvunanirdeuun).■Lpthe lpis known as one of the chapters of the avatamsaka, with its oldest chinesetranslation by dharmaraksa,度世品經(tno.292), surviving as a separate work. The ex-planation is found in all four extant versions of the lp, including dharmaraksa's translation, as quoted below15)計於諸法,悉從縁轉。因虚僞退,從習不順,合於無明十二縁起,至老病死。除不順念,無明則除。無明已除,生老病死永悉除矣。(t1064929-b3)IRk similar expressions are found in all three extant versions of the rk, including theoldest chinese translation by dharmaraksa,文殊師利現寶藏經(tno.461)無清淨寂即立無點。所念靜點,無黠則不立。已無有立,則爲永寂,是謂無點畫。彼以念靜盡,觀四大之身,是爲愚癡之身(t14.41-of these phrases, which are difficult to understand, though,所念靜黜(underlined) and念靜are most likely to coirespondto* yonisomanasikara in the other versions.bguwn only bodhiruci's chinese translation of the bguvvn,大薩遮尼乾子所説經(Tno.272),contains the explanation, as quoted below.
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesdefilement (klesa) originating from erroneous Judgment (ayonisomanasikara)According to the mahayana sutras (t. myazk云何名因?云何名縁?知諸衆生思惟不善是生死因縁。因不善思惟故生長無明,是故不善爲因無明爲縁。因無明故則生於行,是故無明爲因諸行爲縁。如是乃至因生則有老死等苦,是故生則爲因老死爲縁(t9.5c12-15bodhiruci"s Chinese translation, which is about three times the length of the first chinesetranslation. seems to have been greatly extended, and in the counterpart of the tibetantranslatio,there is no parallel phrase.4.The origination of avidya fromayonisomanasikora without connection tothe Twelvefoldprafityasamutpodwe find another type of explanation that avidya originates fromayonisomanasikura havingno connection to the twelvefoldpratityasamutpuda. this type, which the rgv never men-tions and which has not been dealt with in previouis studies, is of signiticance in under-standing the background of the two types of explanations. This third type appears in thefollowing two sutras: the*aiatasatrukaukrtyavinodanasutrakv and the *ratna-meghasutra rgh).AXkv The explanation appears in all the extant versions of the ak8), including theoldest chinese translationby lokaksema,阿闍世王經(tno.626)阿閣世王復問:"助貪愛者根爲在何所?"佛言:e無黠是。"則復問:"誰是無點?"佛言:"所作與念異是故根。"(〓15395b26-29)The above quoted passage is a link in the unique causal relationship in the djkvas fol-〓間相性集工会集用故胞3術言ニ無跡足〓頭復間〓能無造敬言lows.
popakarmviparytkayadrsti*aviyonisomanasikara(smaropa: onlyi tib.)bhutaparikambhutaRngh among the five existing versions of the rngh, only the second chinese transla-tion by*Mandrasena(曼陀羅仙)and *Samgabhara(僧伽婆羅),大乘寶雲經(Tno.659),provides the explanation.是諸煩惱從何縁生?是諸因縁復依何生?即得知見煩惱因縁則是無明,無明因縁不善思惟。不善思惟復何因生?不聽正法。不聽正法復何因縁?不近善友。如是知已煩惱因縁,煩惱源由,煩惱境界。(t16.2-29)n the other versions9), we findno sentences corresponding to the underlined ones.5.conclusionsIn this paper i have examined some of the mahayana sutras not mentioned in previous
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesdefilement (klesa) originating from erroneous judgment (ayonisomanasikara)According to the mahayana sutras (t. mryazaki)studies that contain the explanation that klesa originates fromayonisomanasikara, which isattested in the ybrahp, the lp, the rk, the akv, bodhiruci's translation of the bgvn(大薩遮尼乾子所説經)and the chinese translation of the rgh by* Mandrasena and *Samga-bhara(大乘寶雲經).such sutras as the gagp and the jia that have been examined in theprevious studies are closely connected to the Tathagatagarbha Theory or the rgv, whilethe Mahayana sutras I have discussed in this paper seem to have nothing to do with themMoreover, it is worthy of note that the vbrahp, the rk and the ajkvcan be categorized asthe sutras of Maniusri.Given that the explanation is found in the old chinese translations such as loka-ksema's translation of the akvand dharmaraksa's translation of the dhr, the lp and theRk, it seems quite possible that the explanation was introduced into the mahayana sutras ata comparatively early stage. Moreover, unlike the texts of the sarvastivadin, the 4ikvhasthe unique explanation that avicyu originates froayonisomoncsikora without contectionto the twelvefoldpratityasamutpdda, and we thereforewe need to be concerned with notonly the sarvustivodin's intluence on these mahayana sutras, but also the mutual relationsbetween the Mahayana sutras20).)meior, M., "controversy on the mutual conditioning of avidya and ayonisomanas (i) kara invasubandhu's abhidharmakosa," journal of the international college for advanced buddhiststudies#4,〓012)takasaki, j., "kyakuiin-bonno: nyoraizo-shiso no bonno-ron," nyoruizo-shiso j, pp.219-252,1988(first published in175).3)sasaki, s., 〓the explanation of the origination of kles in the ratnagotravibhoga" i japa-nese),jbs#40-1,pp.389-383,1991.4)matsuda. k.. "Three sutras on the pratitycsamutpad theory in the chinese version of thesamyuktagama" n japanese), bukkyyo kenkyu#1,pp.89-99,1984.5)in the v.the gp  quoted inch.〓-vi-unoriginated character of theInnate mind'. In this paper, the chapters and the sections of the rgv follows Takasaki, J. [1996]a studyo the ratnagotrauibhogttaratantra).6)大集經虚空蔵菩薩品tno.397(8)13.1247-125al;大集大虚空藏菩薩所問經tno.40413.4,tib. trans. Pu838. however, in the latter half of the examplesguoted by the Rgn4046,tib.pu3-),the oldest chinese translationin the daiing, Tno.397(8), lacks the explanation.7)思益梵天所問經tno51,勝思惟梵天所問經tno.5871bb.trans. pphu7b1-.
The japanese ssociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesdefilement (klesa) originating from erroneous judgment (ayonisomanasikara)According to the mahayana sutras (T. myaak)8)inthe rv,the j quotedinch.i-〓-the doctrine as the truth of Extinction?.9)Skt. of the ji,如來莊嚴智慧光明入一切佛境界經Tno.357129,諸佛境界智光明莊嚴經tno.35912.2-29.10)takasaki, j., the formationof the tathagatagarbha theory japanese),197,pp.〓6.
11)taisho reads〓愼",but we take the variant〓順"in the Three editions(宋元明三本)and theold song edition belonging to the library of the imperial household(宮内庁本).12)see note 11.13)大集經無尽意菩薩品Tno.397(12)13.1973,tib. trans.aksayamatinirdes-sitra, (ed. by braarvig, j.,1993)ipp.7-76.the counterpart of the dharmnaraksa's translation阿差末菩薩經(Tno.403.572-7) does not contain the explanation.14)[大宝積經菩薩蔵會Tno.3(12)11.1999;大乘菩薩藏正法經tno.3161785c27-73,tib. trans. p dsi29235.[]t11.202-1,t11.786b293dsi296[〓]t11.200-22,11.7-2dsi29295a2.t11.228,11.879wi21-2.15)六十華厳tno.27892,八十華厳tno.2790b-9,tib. trans. p si1616)大方廣寶〓經tno.4621tib. trans. p chu3517)tib. trasu88. The first chinese translation of the bgunn,菩薩行方便境界神通變化經(Tno.271),has no counterpart.18)普超三味經tno.62716;未曾有正法經tno.62879,tib. trans. p tsu2b2.
19)實雲經tno.6816.231,寶雨經tno.61315-17,除蓋障菩薩所問經tno.489.14737b23,tib. trans. P dzu 8b2.20)we find two instances of this explanation in大薩遮尼乾子所説經and大乘寶雲經as well.considering the fact that other versions of these sutras do not contain this account, these expla-nations must have been incorporated later in the process oftransmission or translation. This mayindicate that this understanding would have been spread among the transmitters and the transla-tors of the mahayana sutras.(key words)ayonisomamasikura, klesa, avicya, the twelvefold pratiiyasumutpucc, ratnao-travibhaga, sarvastivadin, mahayana sutras(Graduate student, The university of tokyo, jSps research fellow)
