The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudiesNagariuna's views of dependent origination andthe buddha
GosHIMa kivotaka0. preamble i have until now written several articles about Nagarjuna.1in this article Iwish to focus on the central issues discussed in these articles and reexamine them.1.Twelve-factored dependent origination in the muiamadhyamakakuriko um)The only chapter in which the twelve factors (of dependent origination) are directly men.tioned is chapter 26.In this chapter. the traditional interpretation of twelve-factoreddependent origination is explained in plain terms with a focus on dependent origination ofarising aspect, and dependent origination of cessation aspect is touched on only in the lasttwo of the twelve verses making up this chapter. it has been suggested that this chapter wasan early work of nagarjuna that was appended to the mkby other people or by nagarjunahimself to serve as an explanation of dependent origination in tetms of conventional truth.Setting aside the question of whether or not this view is coirect, the following verse ispremised on the explanation of dependent origination of arising aspectinxxvi.2-5.Since what is seen and the act of seeing do not exist, the foursome of consciousness and so o i.e.jonsciousness, contact, sensation, and craving ) do not exist. how then could attachment and so or(i.e., attachment, existence, birth, and old age and death) arise? kii.8)[n addition, the following verse could be described as a succinct explanation of depen-dent origination of cessation aspect.attachment is extinguished when [discriminating thoughts of]"mine"" and"" have been de-stroyed both externally and internally. Through its destruction, birth is destroyed. kxvii.4.This verse is immediately followed by this important verse:from the destruction of karma and defilement there is liberation. karma and defilement are due todiscriminating thought. These are due to linguistic proliferation. but linguistic proliferation is ex-tinguished in emptiness. (kXv.5)This can be expressed schematically as 〓linguistic proliferatiodiscriminating thought〓karma and deflement"" and "emptinessextinction of linguistic proliferatiode-
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesnagarjuna's views of dependent origination and the buddha (k. goshIMA)struction of karma and defilement〓liberation." it is to be suimised that "karma and de-filement" correspond to the twelve-factored chain of dependent origination, which startswith ignorance and formative forces, and illustrate dependent origination of arising aspect,while "linguistic proliferation" and "discriminating thought" indicate inverted or erroneousviews, which are the cause of transmigration, and that the sequence " emptiness〓extinc-tion of linguistic proliferatiodestruction of karma and defilement→liberation" showsdependent origination of cessation aspect through the cultivation of emptiness. as is indi-cated by the following two verses, inverted or erroneous views are used in the kk inthesense of linguistic proliferation.Thus ignorance is extinguished through the extinction of the [ four] inversions [of self, purity, per-manence, and bliss]. when ignorance has been extinguished, formative forces and so on are extinguished. (kxxii.23)lt has been stated by the victors (ie., buddhas) that emptiness is the relinquishing of all [errone-ous」 views. but they have said that those who are possessed of the view ofemptiness are incorrigi-ble. (k〓.8)
To sum up, dependent otigination in the hルkk is underpinned by the buddha's teach-ing of twelve-factored dependent origination, and the twelve-factored dependent origina-tion that was expounded in the agamas with nirvana as its goal through the annihilation oferroneous and inverted views has been reinterpreted as an auspicious teaching that leads toliberation through the cessation of linguistic proliferation and the extinction of discriminat-ing thoughts ( thatis, dependent origination underpinned by emptiness).2.the Relationship between dependent origination and emptiness in the mk, themeaning of dependent origination is clearly indicated first of all in the dedicatory verse.Ipay homage to the fully enlightened one (ie., buddha),the best of preachers, who taught depen-dent origination, according to which levery existent」 has no ceasing, no arising, no annihilationno eternalness, no identity, no difference, no coming, and no going, and which is quiescent of lin-ulistic proliferation and auspicious. (k, mangalasloka)here, "dependent origination" is used in three senses. First, it is explained in temms ofthe eight negations of "no ceasing, no arising," and so on, and this corresponds to depen-dent origination as indicative of the nature of individual existents. This could be said to ex-plain the content of dependent origination. Secondly, it is "quiescentof linguistic prolifera-tion and auspicious." This shows that the goal of dependent origination is the auspiciousstate of nirvana. the third aspect is dependent origination as the teaching of the buddha
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesNagarjuna's views of dependent origination and the buddha (k. goshiMa)(8(budchauucana). the following verse is also important:whatever is dependent origination, that we declare to be emptiness. itis provisional designation. itis itself the middle way. (kxxiv.18)This shows the fourth meaning of dependent origination, defined as "emptiness." (r〓xtv.36 we find the phrase "semptiness that is dependent origination.") "provisional designation"refers to the fact that individual entities and existents are mere designations with no realsubstance, and itis synonymous with what was expressed by the eight negations and pointsto the content of dependent origination. it should go without saying that dependent origina-tion as the " middle way"" cotresponds to the buddha's teaching.Thus the dedicatoty verse represents nothing other than the main thesis of the mnk,namely, that dependent origination as taught by the buddha is dependent origination char-acterized by the eight negations (non-substantiality and emptiness), and this is demonstratedby the mk as a whole. to all intents and purposes, the proof ends with chapter 23,ancichapter24 it is declared that dependent origination as taught by the buddha is nothingother than emptiness as propounded by the author (xxiv.18), with the validity of this be.ing asserted at the end of the samne chapter by the statement that whoever sees dependentorigination ie., emptiness) sees the four noble truths (xxv.40). Then, in the final verse ofChapter2xxv.24)itis ascertained that the goal of emptiness is nirvana, whichis quies-cent of linguistic proliferation and auspicious, and in the final verse of chapter 27(xxv.30)it is confirmed that this is nothing other than the "right dharma"e., dependenorigination) taught by the buddha for the purpose ofquashing all erroneous viewsAmong other works attributed to nagarjuna, the yuktisastika  and vigrahavyavar-tami  faithfully follow the view of dependent origination set forth in the mmk. how-ever, the words "empty" and "emptiness" are not used in the yg, and the content of depen-dent origination is expressed in terms of non-arising and non-cessation. The vv, on theother hand, being a treatise about logic, displays no interest whatsoeverin dependent origi-nation of cessation aspect, which explains the process leading to the quiescence of linguis-tic proliferation and the destruction oferroneous views, that is, the goal of dependent origi-nation i., nirnana).as is shown in the following section, the sunyatasaptati (Ss) equatesthe content of emptiness with interdependent origination, and as can be clearly seen in theverse quoted below, its views of emptiness and nirvana are quite different from thosefound in the k(emptinessextinction of linguistic proliferationdestruction of karma and
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesnagarjuna's views of dependent origination and the buddha (k. GoshIMA)defilement-liberation),〓
any existent that arises in dependence o something does not arise when that is absent. Existenandnon-existent, conditioned and unconditioned are tranauil and extinguished. (s63)The ratnavati  also differs markedly from the k in its stance towards depen-dent origination. This is because, to begin with, the term  dependent origination" does notappear in the Ra, with the content and goal of dependent origination being considered axi-omatic premises, and it is strongly argued that the mahayana symbolized by the term"emptiness," rather than dependent origination, represents the teaching of the buddha. twotypes of dependent origination coexist in the r, and, as can be seen in the following twcverses, itis maintained that the dependent origination of traditional doctrine and dependentorigination underpinnedby emptiness are essentially the same.if, having thus seen the arising of results from causes, one understands that the truth of this worlc(i.e., conventional truth) arises from linguistic proliferation, one does not draw near to non-existence. 5)
again, one who has understood that the cessation of results due to the cessation of causes] hasfrom the viewpoint of [ultimate」 truth, arisen from linguistic proliferation does not draw near toxistence. Therefore, one not relying on both [existence and non-existence] is liberated..1)This means that when one understands that, when viewed from the vantage point oful-timate truth, the conventional truth of the arising and cessationof results due to causes hasmerely arisen from linguistic proliferation, one transcends existence and non-existence,and these two verses represent a summmatization of the dependent origination of traditionaldoctrine and dependent origination underpinned by emptiness by means of a term used to-gether with dependent origination in the k e., "linguistic proliferation").This is be-cause, as was noted above, the  maintains that traditional doctrine and the mahayana areultimately both the teaching of the buddha, with the mahayana being superior in terms ofcontent.
verify atypical example of nagarjuna's dependent origination underpinned by emptiness.[when] whatever existent (x)is established contingently (apeksya) oY] ad[Yis estab-lished contingently on that(x),if the contingent entity (apeksitavya) is established [beforehand]which [of Xand y is established] contingently on which? k x.1.〓
3.does nagariuna expound interdependent origination in the muK First, let usThis can be stated in more general terms in the following manner:xis not dependent on y. xis not non-dependenton y. y is not dependent on x. Y is not non-de-
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist StudiesNagarjuna's views of dependent origination and the buddha (k. goshiMa)pendenton x.
let us simplify it still further.Fommulaxand y are not mutually dependent, nor are they mutually non-dependent.There is also the following example:whatever (x) exists in dependence on something (y),that (x) is not that (y) itself, nor is that(x) different [ from that (y)]. Therefore, itis neither annihilated nor eternal. (kxviii.10)Since X and Y are interchangeable, the gist of this verse can be rephrased in the fol-lowing manner:iormula whenever xand y are mutually dependent, othey are neither identical nor different.In addition, we also find the following formulaFormulacif there are two existents xand Y, when one does not exist, then the other does notexist.
Here is atypical example:when a characteristic does not arise, there cannot be that which is characterized. when that whiclis characterized is not possible, a characteristic does also not arise. (kv.4)These formulae (a, b and c) represent the logic of dependent origination underpinnedby emptiness as set forth in the k. The logic used in the vvand ra, attributed to na-garjuna, also relies on these formulae.,There is. however, one verse in the mk that does not accord with these formulae.In dependence on an action there arises an agent, and in dependence on that agent an action. we donot see any other cause oftheir establishment. (kv.12)This corresponds to what later came to be regarded as interdependent origination. itclearly represents a separate formulation of sectioniFormula b. let us call this devel-opmental Forma.evelopmental Formxand Y are mutually dependent (or are premised on each other).The distinctive character of the logic of the mnk lies in sectionq of Formula b, ancthe question is whether it is possible to convey nagarjuna's true intent solely by means ofsectione., developmental Forma) from which section q has been removed. could thisverse viii.12have been inserted later by proponents of interdependent origination2 r,taking into account the surrounding context, should one consider it to imply Formula aoB?
This developmental formais frequently used in the ss. let us consider just one typi-
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesnagatjuna's views of dependent origination and the buddha (k. goshInacal example.
〓
Since rignorance does not occur without formative forces, and formative forces do not occur with-out it (igmorance), sboth become a cause for one another, and therefore they are not establishedthrough inherent existence. (11)Section rcorresponds to Formula c above, while section S corrcsponds to sectionpofFormula b., developmental Forma).when considered as a whole, it would seem to fol-low the logic of the huk, but this use of developmental forma is not found in the hnk.The seventh-century candrakirti wrote commentaries on the ss and ys from the perspec-tive of interdependence (parasparopeksa), but neither formulae a, b and c nor develop-mental Forma are found in the ys.atthe start of the vaidabyaprakarana v there is the following sutra, which presentsa still further developed form.The means of cognition and object of cognition are both intermixed (and cannot be differentiated).(V, sutrc
According to nagarjuna's explanation, this can be formularized in the following man-ner.
developmental formxnd y aremutually dependent and intermixed.Furthermore, in the commentary ovii.11kvi.12)ich'ing-s commen-try preservedin chinese we find the following statementdeeds are not predetermined. a deed is caused by a person, and the agent exists in dependence onthe deed. The agent is also not determined. in dependence on there being an action he is called aragent. because of the union of the two, an act and an agent are established. if they arise ffronrrunion, they have no own-nature. because they have no own-nature, they ate emptyThis too is an advanced fotmof developmental fodevelopmental formcand y act as causes for each other and are in union.In this manner, the understanding characterized by interdependent origination was emphasized first in the ss (developmental Form a),then developed as a relationship betweerconcepts in the v(developmental form b),and was firmly established in commentaries othe k(developmental formc).This means that the view of dependent originationchanged and evolved in works attributed to nagarjuna andin commentaries on the k.4.how does nagariuna view the buddha?when one examines how nagarjuna viewsthe buddha in the mhkk.especiallv the buddha who preaches the dharma, it becomes
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesNagarjuna's views of dependent origination and the buddha (k. gosHIMa)clear that, except in the dedicatory verse, buddha in the singular refers to sakyamuni whctaught the traditional doctrines of buddhism, while buddhas in the plural refer to thosewho supported nagarjuna's thought (or buddhas of the Mahayana). i shall cite a typical ex-ample of each usage.Inthe instructions to katyayang it is" and "it is not" were both refuted by the blessed one (e,buddha), whois adept in existence and non-existence. (mkkxv.7)Not identical. not different, not annihilated. and not eternal: this is the nectar of that teaching of theBuddhas, lords of the world. (kxvii.11)The dedicatory verse, on the other hand, declares that buddha in the singular taught thedoctrine of dependent origination characterized by non-arising, non-cessation, etc. in otherwords. the dedicatory verse presents the main thesis, and throughout the muknagarjunaseeks to prove that Sakyamumi taught dependent origination underpinned by emptiness. ashas already been noted, he maintains, in other words, that emptiness is the teaching of thebuddha.
However, in the ys buddha in the singular is the buddha who teaches dependent origi-nation characterized by non-arising, non-cessation, etc., while buddhas in the plural areteachers of the traditional doctrines. This means that the view of the budcha(s) found inthe mk has been reversedin the ys. again, i shall cite one example of each usage.Ipay homage to the chief of seers (ie., buddha), who has taught dependent origination, the prin-ciple by which birth and extinction are elimninated. yg, dedicatory verse)lust as 〓i" and "mine" were taught by the victors (i.e., buddhas) for a purpose (lit., that whiclmust be done, ie., instruction of people), in the same way they have taught the [five] aggregatestwelve] sense-fields, and [eighteen] elements for a purpose. (y33)There are few examples in the ss and vv, and so it is difficult to say anything defini-tive, but of particular interest is the r. here it is stressed that buddhas in the plural areuniversal and ideal entities transcending any differences between mahayana and non-ma-hayana, while buddha in the singular refers to their concrete manifestation, that is, Sakya-muni as a historical entity and a leader of the Mahayana movement (ie., sakyamuni as theexpositor of mahayana doctrine). let us consider a pair oftypical examples.Therefore, the victors (i.e., buddhas) said, 〓allthings are without self." confirming that all thingsare composed ofsix elements, they also [sid],"They do not really exist."i.2)Thus neither self nor no-self are to be apprehended as real. Therefore, the great seer (ie., bud-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesnagarjuna's views of dependent origination and the buddha (k. GoshIMadha) rejected the two views that there is a self and there is not a self. i3lt is thus evident that the author of the R sought to explain the conduct of the reabuddha (buddha in the singular) on the basis of the ultimate truth taught by buddhas in theplural.
5. concluding remarks In the above we have examined the views of dependent origination and the buddha in several works attributed to nagariuna (k, y, ss, v, vp and raSince the aims, subject matter, and putative opponents of these works all differ, one cannotmaking any sweeping generalizations, but there is probably no denying that these worksdiffer considerably in their understanding of dependent origination and the buddha. whileone could not escape the charge of overhastiness were one to immediately draw the conclu-Sion on this basis that the author of the hnk differed from the author (s) of the otherworks, it is probably true that a consideration of this possibility is essential when studyingNagarjuna's thought. accordingly, i should like to suggest the following hypothesis re-garding the author (s) of the works attributed to Nagarjuna.about 150years passed between the deaths of nagariuna (c.150-250) and aryadevaaround the middle of the third century) and the time of buddhapalita (c.370-450).4)i wouldlike to imagine that this was a period of productivity" during which some anonymous au-hors made free use of nagariuna's logic and reasoning to write what might be called "na-garjuna literature." Just as the appearance of the prainaparamitoisutra stimulated otheranonymous authors to produce many and varied mahayana sutras on the basis of its doc-trine ofemptiness and view of the bodhisattva, in the same way may the appearance of the〓kk not have stimulated other anonyinous authors to produce various treatises on the basis of its logic and arguments by considering how nagarjuna might have responded to theproblems they were facing? by this time early works of the yogacara school had alreadybeen composed and the theories of cognition-only and three natures had been born. itwould not be surprising if statements suggestive of cognition-only or the theory of threenatures and arguments that would appear to be rebuttals premised on these ideas were con-tained in some of the works attributed to nagariuna (e.g., 〓ad catulstava). later theseworks gradually came to be recognized as works by nagarjuna on account of their consis-tency with the lkk aid nagarjuna's logic and reasoning。1)"Nagarjuna's view of the buddha. taking into account the question of the authorship of〓Na-
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesgarjuna literature"", indogaku chibettogaku kenkyu12008),pp.137-169,"Nagarjuna's in-terpretation of dependent origination)with a special focus on interdependence"", nantobukky92(2008), pp.1-26,nagariuna's interpretation of dependent originationwith aspecial focus ontwelve-factored dependent origination"", nanto bukky3(2009), pp.1-37.2)as is shown hereinafter, verses .50and i.present a summarization of the two kinds of de-pendent origination expressed in the four verses cited in this note and the following note.seeing that there is a cause to arising, one transcends non-existence. lSeeing that」 cessationis accompanied by acause, one does not draw near to existence.Acause that arises before [a result] or arises simultaneously [with a result] does not possesscausality in the sense (arthatas) [ofthe word cause" ], for arising is not recognizedeitherasaconventional designation (prajnapti ) or as truth (tatnvotos).r47I.46we find a traditional interpretation of dependent origination, clearly stating that there isinvariably a cause behind the arising and cessation of things. 〓.47presents a typical interpreta-tion of dependent origination underpinned by emptiness, arguing that because the word 〓cause'presupposes a result, it is inrational in terms of its meaning to say that a cause alone arises separately from the result either before the tesult or simultaneously with the result.3)in the R we find the examples of "long and short" and "flame and light," cited by candrakirtia concrete examples of interdependence. 〓long and short" is an example of Fonmulae.,dependent origination underpinned by emptiness), while " llame and light"" shows a temporallyunilinear causal relationship e., dependent onigination as explained intraditional doctrine).when there is this, there is that, as, for example, when there is long, there is short. when thisarises, that arises, as, for example, when a flame arises, light arises. .48)Meanwhile, if there is no short, long does not exist since it has no inherent existence (svg-bhavatas).again, if a flame does not arise, light does also not arise.)4)according to akira Saito, "is Nagarjuna a madhyamika?"(studies in the lotus sutra ac〓ahoyana sufras; sankibo busshorin, 206), pp.()),nagariuna was a founder ofthe mahayana-abhidharma movement and antedates the establishment of the so-called madhva-mika and yogacara schools. Saito refers to this stage as pre-madhyamika and pre-Yogacara. af-ter two early commentaries had been composed around the fourth century, the oldest stratum ofthe yogucarabhumi (mauli bhumih""), which might be described as belonging to the early yo-gacara, appeared around the fourth to fifth centuries. This was followed by the birth of the theo-ries of cognition-only and three natures, and yogacara sutras and treatises such as the sam-dhinirmocanasutra and ahayanasutralamkara were composed. it was after this thatbuddhapalita, a self-styled propounder of dependent origination," appeared.kThis article was translated into english through the translation service of the toho gakkai. but fi-nal responsibility for the text lies with the author.(key words) nagarjuna, madhyamakakarika, pratityasamutpada, sunyata, parasparapeksio(part-time lecturer, Shuchiin university, bukkyo university )
