The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudieSThe islamic allegorical Framework for YogaSakakI kazuyo(0)In the history of intercultural exchange, how was yoga transmitted to the islamicworld? among the large body of secular and religious Sanskrit texts rendered into arabicand persian, the amrtakunda and adapted literary texts are the most widely circulated.How have the translations of this work succeeded in gaining popularity in Sufi and othelscholarly circles in different islamic languages beyond indian Subcontinent?The main teason for this could be the narrative technique applied to the introductoryand concluding sections. The peculiarity of this work exists in the frame story encasing thetranslation. it disguises the work as ohe of islamic philosophical literature. This essay examines the frame story in the translation of the amrtakunda and discusses how an allegori-cal framework succeeds in representing yoga as the wisdom of self-realization.(1)most of the existent manuscripts of this translation are entitled the cisternoflife〓wd-hayat), both inrabic (Ha) andinpersian p); however, they were origi-nally entitled the hirror of nature that reflects the world ofhumn beings (mir' at al-ma ani li al-'alam al-insani). This suggestive title reflects the translator's intention and theoriginal contents. in the introduction, the author natrates the stoty (hikaya) as the answertcthe query about the origin and the return (al-mabda' wa al-ma ad) 33,〓HP1bh3).The story begins with a description of the protagonist's homeland. he was ordered bythe king of the country to leave home and travel to the city of life (al-bilad al-ma"mur) andto not forget the covenant ('ahd).aminister of the king explained the hardships and diff-culties that the protagonist would encounter on his journey, including two great seas, sevenmountains, four passes, three stations, and the final narrow path.Here, the author interpolates the arabic translation of the story of love in the treatiseon the realipy oflove iq al-shg) by shihab al-din yahya al-Suhrawardi (al-Maq-tul)(d.1191)(〓a415,hP14a-1b, suhrawardi: 276-281).This story depicts thejourney of the soul in exploring the human body and its eventual unity with its source. The
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesdestination of the soul is the homeland of love or the city of Spirit (shahristan-i jan)Suhrawardi fomulated an image of the city with the description of man as a microcosm inthe epistles 'i) of the brethren of purity (Ikhwan al-safa' c.10c.) Rsa'i〓.390-95,458-59,468-70,3.216,219-20.242).with the underlying concept that creator constructed the human body along the linesof a city, the inner world of the human body is described as follows. The five externalsenses are like policing agents, the five internal perceptions (sensus communis, imagination,thought, apprehension, and memory) are subservient to the king, and the seven intemnal activepowers (attraction, sustenance, digestion, repulsion, nutrition, growth, and formation) are like theartisans of the city. the description of each faculty is rather modified in sequence, howev-er, the details follow the original.following the route suggested by the minister, the protagonist reached the destinatiorand found the chief of the city. greeting each other, he recognized that the chief was theking and a reflection of himself. bewildered, he found the minister who assured his safereturn and persuaded him to immerse himself in the water of life (ma' al-hayat, ab-i zinda-gani). The immersion reminded the protagonist of his covenant. he recognized that all thathe experienced are allusions to and symbols ofthe attainment of salvation and eternal hap-piness through the gnosis(a6,-16a).In the last chapter, the protagonist returns to his homeland- the non-being country( adim al-bilad) or the invisible world ('alam al-ghayb).The author says that the intellect islike amirror which reflects impure things. if you wish to polish the mirror, abandon sensu-al perceptions and the mirror will show you who you are and the time of your death. hereagain, the unity of the minister and the protagonist himself is explained through an allu-sion. the ministet splits a spider's thread into two, unites it again, and declares that onetimes one is one (a342-43Pb-31a)(2)muslim intellectuals have sought esoteric meanings behind the symbolic words in theform of allegorical narratives. The author leads Muslim readers to the process of spiritual re-alization by way of the literature of aliens (adab al-ghulaba), which was familiar to poets, phi-losophers and sufi masters. The typical tenets of alienation to invoke reunification with theorigin and the wisdom of uncovering new values ate embodied in the frane stoty of the hH.Ia recent study (emst 2006),having admitted the transformations and new intenpreta-tions. emnst carl observed that despite the elimination of the salient features of this tale in-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiescluding the pearl itself, the introductory narrative of this work retains the core themes ofthe original story of the hy of the pearlin the acts of thomas. however, instead of thereference to the royal garment and robe in the hymn ofthe pearlin muhammad ghawth〓spersian version, the ocenof life (batr-ayat)h4),the framing narratives in theother versions fail to depict the important elements of the hynnn and have much relevanceto suhrawardi's allegories.having described that suhrawardi's philosophical allegories beginning with the west-〓xile (hikmat al-jshraq) bear much resemblance to the elements of the hymn of thepearl, henry corbin suggests that the translator or compiler of this work might have beenan iranian intellectual who was acquainted with the illuminationist school (corbin329).The translator models the allegorical stories of Suhrawardl, which inherit ibn sina's plotand style to outline the core part of the work, and interpolates the portion ofthe story takerdirectly fron suhrawardl"s original work.The frame story depicts the descending journey of the protagonist, from the royal king-dom in the celestial realm into the physical world, as a microcosm to find his self and re-turn to his original abode. From the islamic perspective, the minister's assurance of a safereturn denotes the primordial assent to the divine tealm of his homeland. This representsthe pre-etetnal covenant between human beings and god. on the one hand. it symbolizesthe ecstasy ofunification, andon the other, it accompanies the absolute submission to God.This frane stoty can be read as the master's initiation tales to the disciple. in the teach-ing tradition of sufism, a novice should concentrate on the narrative which is orally narrat-edby the master. once the novice is admitted, the master unfolds the symbolical meaningof the narrative. the contextual interpretation of the hh leads muslimn rcaders to the real-ization of one's self through knowledge and the obligatory preparation for the return to theoriginal abode of the self. For this purpose, the novices should attain purified intellectthrough a visionary contemplation of the unity of the self and the divine with the help ofyogic discipline and tantric visualization.(3)the hH, as i have already examined (Sakaki2005),is an inspired rendering of the yo-gico-tantric doctrines and disciplines of the Natha tradition. before the advent of islam inIndian subcontinent, yogic practices were reported as wonders by muslim travellers. and asthe consequences of the power of apprehension (wahm) by geographers and philosophers.In the same way, the knowledge transmitted by the yogin from kamarupa was described as
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSthe islamic allegorical Framework for Yoga (k. sakaki)the science of breath and the influence of the wahm of the soul and celestial forces (vat.Pers.20.ff. 〓a,15b).In the framework of the journey, beginning with the account of the extemal correspon-dence between microcosm and macrocosm, the science of breath (svarodaya) is incorporat-ed as the subiect in question. This includes the classification of breaths, divination throughbreaths, hatha-yogic disciplines such as a purification practice with the eyes ( trataka) andfive kinds of postures, the meditation on the seven cakras and the invocation of seven ce-lestial spirits and their propitiation. The author insists that the stained mirror should be pol-ished by way of the observation of breaths and the abandonment of sensual perception ifone wishes to know the inner world a32,p 30a).among the texts of the natha tradition, we find the Retentionof breaths (s-i anfas)styled as a conversation between matsyendranatha and goraksanatha. itis a persian trans-lation of extracts from the longer version of the goraksasataka. beginning with the pro-cess of world creation from the primordial spirit (jan), the translator proceeds to the expla-nation of the microcosm. The stained mitror of the intellect should be polished through theextraction of sensual faculties from the sensual obiect. For the purpose of emancipationfrom the bondage caused by the actions generated by the sense perceptions, the knowledge(inana) of six-limbed discipline of yoga is called for (p-i antas ff.a,5a).The idea of the coirespondence between microcosm and macrocosm is universal andvery familliar to nathas. The view that the human body functions like a city is also foundinclassical literature , however, one padof gorakhbani gives us an utterance of some interestThe human body is like a city (shahr). Intellect (manas) is the gate of the city where theking (padshah) is Shiva (Hari ) who protects vital breaths (prana), thought is a judge (qazi),the five elements are the ministers (vazir), the mind is an elephant, breath is a horse, consciousness is a warehouse, and intelligence is a chief police officer (kotval) gorakhbanipad27).as is often found in Sant literature, we see the evidence of relevant ideas in natheliterature in terms of perso-arabic terms(4)when a religious ruling (fatwa) to avoid yoga exercises like reciting mantras and actsof worship was issued in malaysia and indonesia, because it could cause muslim practitio-ners to deviate from their beliefs, considerable confusion and controversy arose. religiousauthorities said that if it was purely a sport ora means of exercise, it could be practiced andshould not declared to be prohibited (haram). however, from the beginning stages of mu-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiestual communication, voga attracted muslim intellectuals as a ineans of divine knowledgeof and preference for their spiritual needs.In the natha tradition. self-realization (tattva-darsana, tattva-bodha) is the essentialtheme. The allegorical frame stoty secures muslim intellectuals the realization of the unityof the self with the universal Soul through the visualization of the universe in the novice'sbody and the return to its primary spiritual source -pure intellect. for this purpose, the pu-rification of the intellect by abandoning sensual perceptions is required as an obligatorypreparation.
as Ibn sina recognized the importance of breath in relation to the psychic process, theMuslim translator succeeded in representing the manner of self-realization in the wovenbody with various threads of breath guided by one's own wisdom and by alien knowledge.Bh bahr-apat, muhammad ghawth gwaliyari, delhi,1311a.h.(1893-4).Corbin, henry,〓m iranienspects spirituels et philosophigues, tome ii, sohrawardi et lesplatoniciens de perse, paris: gallimard,1971.Emst, w. carl: 〓fragmentary versions of the apoctyphal hymn of the pearl in arabic, turkish,persian and urdu"", jerusalem studies iarabic amd islam, vol.33,2006, (www.unc.edu/censt/ar-ticles.htm)
Gorakhbani, ed. pitambardatta barthvala, prayaga: hindi Sahitya Sammelana, Samvat199(tedn.),
〓ha "la version arabe de l'amratkund"", yusuf Husain, journal asiatique ccXii. octobre-decembre 1928.291-344.H -ayat, manuscript preserved in the salar jung museum library, cat. no.(maimufa2) ff.12b-31a.Ikhwan al-safa', rs'-ikhwul-afa",vols., beirut: dar sadir.1957.vat. pers.2 manuscript preservedin vatican library, persian no.20. cf. sakaki2005.138.Sakaki, kazuyo, "yogico-tantric traditions in the hawd al-hayat", jonrnal ofthe japanese associ-ationfor south studies, 2005,17,68-91.Suhrawardi, Shihab al-in yahya, fihaqiqat al-〓ishq ya mu'unis al-ushshaq, euvres phi-losophiques et mystiques, tome iii, ceuvres en person, ed. Seyyed hossein nasr, Teheran. acade-mie imperiale iranienne de philosophie,1977.(key words) amrtakunda, Shihab al-din suhrawardi, gorakhbani, yoga, allegory(Part-time lecturer, hokkaido musashi women's Junior college, ph.d.
