The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiStStudieslinking the buddha's attainment of Supreme enlightenmentto the welfare of beings in the suvarnaprabhoasaSUZUKI Takayasu1.The aimof This paperacontinuous verification of the HypothesisThe present author has proposed and verifled the following hypothesis about the in-tentions of the compilers of the suvarnaprabhustra ofgolenlght, )2<The hypothesis) owing to the account of the su which has, through the several stages of itsformation, collectedd and demonstrated the various kinds of doctrines and rites of both mundane andsupermundane levels, the compilers and the proponents of the suy became more able to lead theitdaily religious lives in accordance with the teaching of [ Mahayana] buddhism." we can thereforenteipret the features appearing in the smv not as a token of "the assimilation of buddhism intoHinduism"or " the depravity of buddhism." but as an attempt of buddhists to survive in the indianreligious world by emphasizing the value, the usefulness, and the completeness of [mahayana]buddhism under the circumstances where hinduism had become more and mote dominant ovetBuddhism (during and after the gupta period). moreover, if one of the intentions of the compilersof the su lay in this attempt by collecting as many doctrines and rites as possible from the stage ofthe formation of the u, to that of the s,consistently, we can suppose that the intention of theconpilers remained unchanged all through the stages of the formation of the suv. furthermore, i1may turn out that the smy is not 〓a mere miscellaneous medley of doctrines and rites," but a collec-tionof them which is intrinsic to the value of the s,suzuki [2has provided the most recent study on this subiect, and the followingtentative conclusion has been reached:Buddhism had once stood foremost in the religious world of india under the patronage of thegreat kings such as king asoka of the maurya Empire and king kaniska of the kushan empire.However during and after the Gupta period when the suv was compiled, buddhism had alreadylost its dominant position to hinduism. under such circumstances the compilers of the snv, by ob-taining various kinds of aid of the kings as well as of their people, must have attempted to survivein the religious world for the sake of accomplishing the duties of the buddhist clergy.whereas the religious merits aimed atin the five chapters on the various gods and goddessesand the devendrasamaya-parivaria, which are successive six chapters and located just before thesuscmbhava-parivarta, are mainly mundane ones, those aimed at in the susamnbhava-parivarta are
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieslinkiny the buddha s attainment of supreme enliphtenment tothe welfare of beings inthe suuarpaprabhasg. uzuk)(supermmundane ones. Therefore by teaching those discourses of these successive seven chapters("the five chapters," the devendrasamioy-parivaria, and the susambha-pariparta), the com-pilers of the suv became able to expect the offerings notonly from the people who wanted to attainmundane merits. but also fromm those who wanted supermundane meritsThis paper continues to verify (the hypothesis> and the tentative conclusion by exam-ining the yaksasraya-parivarta (chapter on the refuge of the Yaksas, chapter 22 of the sm),4)which directly follows the usambhav-parivcrta, and attempts to connect supermundanemerits with mundane ones.2.a Survey of the yaksusray-parivarta chapter on the Refuge of theYaksas; chapter22)In the preceding susambhava-parivarta the buddha sakyamuni tells the story of hisformer lives in which he obtained his enlightenment and attained dhcrmakaya (the bodycomposed of the law) through the offerings originated in the hearing of the suv. then theLord spoke to the goddess sri and preached this chapter22with77)verses. we will begiiby making a survey with translations,9  and notes put in bold brackets.The address of the lord to sri, and verse l ad2The lord spoke,]"whoevershould desire to do inconceivable honor to all the buddhas and to know the profoundphere ofall the buddhas, he must approach the place where this Smvis expounded and lis-en to the suv carefully."(Summarized translation) Ithough to come to know the buddhasphere can be regarded asa supermundane mmerit, we will fnd everywhere in the discoursof this chapter 22accounts on the attainment of mundane merits.!verse〓-This suy is full of inconceivable virtues and is the king of sutras that resles all beings from numerous oceans of woes."8)(Summarized translation) 【this accounpecomes a background that assures the attainment of merits through the hearing and honor-ing of the suv.】Verse6-9he who [wants to] enter the sphere of the law (aharmadhatu) must entewhere there is the stupa whose nature is the law dharmatmaka), profound, well-estab-ished. and in the midst of this stupa he will see the buddha sakyamuni expounding thissutra in a pleasant voice. however many millions of aeons, inconceivable, incalculable pe-riods, he experiences divine and hunan pleasures, one who hears this sutra will know thatan inconceivable mass of merit has been thus acquired by him.9)【we can here present
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSfollowing two formulae: one is "the 〓the sphere of the lwthe stupa whose naturis the law," and the other is "to enter the sphere of the lwenter the stupa whose nature is the lwhear the smv." From the account that "in the midst of this stupa he willsee the buddha sakyamuni expounding this sutra," we are also able to see that the sup isregarded as the stupa which encloses the whole body of the buddha Sakyamuni. at the be-ginning of this chapter22,as we have seen, the merit granted through the hearing of theSv is supermundane, but the merit referred to here is mundane such as experiencing di-vine and human pleasures.!verse 10-12one who hears this suy (ie. one who enters the stupa whose nature is thaw)can escape various misfortunes."1)(Summarized translation) 【the merit of hearing thSp referred to here is also mundane.】verse13-The preacher of the Suy should sit on a seat resembling a lotus and ex-pound this sutra. after he had left the seat, miracles will be seenon that seat. at times theform of the preacher of the law dharmabhanakarupa) will be seen there. at times the foimof the buddha (buddharupa) and at times the forms of bodhisattvas. Sometimes merely aglow, sometimes the appearance of gods is glimpsed. These miracles are seen for a moment and then disappear."11)(Summarized translation)【the seat on which the smy is expounded turns into a special place where various miracles will be seen. and meeting withBuddhas becomes available not only when one is hearing the Smy(verse8) but also afterone has heard the Suv.in addition to the identification of the  with the stupa (verse8).we can see here that the place where the suv is expounded is regarded as an especially sa-sred place (verse l6).】rse19The buddha's teaching [called the suv] is renowned (prasastam buddhasasanam), producing success in evety case (scrvatra samsiddhikuram), and grants grain ancblessing. These are the signs [ofthe merits] endowed by the buddha [including those re-ferred to below].,12)ferred to below].12)idirectly these merits are brought about through the hearing of theSuv, but all the teachings of the buddha including the suy stem from the attainment of su-preme enlightenment by the buddha. This understanding leads to such expressions as " theigns endowed by the buddha."】verse2"The buddha's teaching [called the su], causing victory, fortune andfame, defeats all enemies in battles."1(summarized translation) Isimilar accounts on thsvictory in battles brought by the sv are repeated four times from verse 20to verse23.
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudieslinking the buddha2's attainmentof supreme enlightenment tothe welfare of beings in the suyarnaprubhasa (.uzuk)(6.uosressoc mblsosbonyonolieriuonemycmoThis emphasis on victory in battles cotresponds well to (the hypothesis) that the compil-rs of the suv must have attempted to obtain various kinds of aid, especially financial aidof the kings.】verse2-26"king brahma, tridasendra, likewise lokapalas, Vajrapani, the lord o1the Yaksas, Samjnaya, the chief conqueror, anavatapta, lord of the Nagas, likewise saga-ra. the lords of the kimnaras and the lords of the asuras, likewise the lords of the garudas-with these placed at the head, all the gods continually honor the inconceivable stupa ofthe law dharmastupa, ie. the suy)."14)【from verse24to the last verse (verse77),protection to those who have heard the suv given by the various gods is explained. we must no-tice that those who are protected by the gods are not the preachers or the holders of the suybut those who have heard the suv.in addition we should be reminded here that lokapalasare the chief characters in chapter 11-12cuturmaharuia-parivarta, see suzuki []) andSaminaya is in chapter19aminaya-parivartg, see suzuki [28]), and both chapter 11-12and chapter19belong to "the Five chapters."】verse 27-32l the excellent lords of the gods will become joyful and speak to onemother: 〓look at all those beings endowed with brilliance, glory, and merits! because of apurified merit-toot they have come here. Those who have come here in order to hear thesmv and honor the stupa of the law dharmastupa) with inconceivable devotion are work-ing for the welfare of beings. They are a vessel for the juice of this good law (saddharmarascbhajcna). Those who hear the suy are those who enter [this stupa of the law (i.e. theS)by entry into the sphere of the law. They have worshipped hundreds of thousands offormer buddhas and because of this merit-toot they hear the sn.")(summarized transla-tion) by repeating the same kinds of accounts as those in the oth verse to the 9th verse,the formula is emphasized that "eto hear the 〓u enter the stupa whose nature is theLawenter the sphere of the law.2)1verse3sand34l these kings of the gods, likewise sarasvati, sni, likewise the foukings including vaisravana, together with hundreds of thousands of Yaksas, will everywhere in the four directions give protection to those who have heard the suv."1(summa-ized translation) The four kings are the chief characters in chapter 11-12caturmaharoia-parivarta, see suzuki [05]),sarasvati is i chapter 15(sarasvati-parivarta, see suzuk[〓04]), and sriisin chapter 16-17(ri-parivarta, see suzuki []) respectively. all thesechapters belong to "the five chapters.")
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies)linking the buddha's attainment of supreme enlightenmnent tothe welfare of beings in the suamnaprabhasa t.uzuR)lerse 3s and3indra, soma, vayu, varuna, Skanda, visnu, Sarasvati, praiapati, andHutasana, all these gods will always give protection to those who have heard the u(Summatized translation)verse37-41and the Yaksa-lords, narayana and mahesvara and the twenty-eigh-others headed by samjnaya will give them protection. and vairapani, lord of the Yaksas,with five hundred yaksas and all the bodhisattvas will give them protection. manibhadra,lord of the yaksas, likewise purnabhadra, kumbhira, atavaka, pingala, and kapila, eachYaksa-lord with five hundred Yaksas, will give protection to those who have heard this su-ra (tesam raksam karisyanti yebhih sutam idam srutam).",18)(Summarized translation) 【fromverse37onward the protection to those who have heard the suv given by the Yaksas is ex-plained, and this series of descriptions can account for the title of this chapter 22.weshould notice here again that Saminaya is the chief character in chapter 19(saminaya-parivarta, see suzuki [20])which belongs to "the five chapters.")verse42-4citrasena, jinarsabha, Manikantha, nikantha, varsadhipati, Mahagrasa.Mahakala, likewise suvarnakesa, pancika, chagalapada, likewise Mahabhaga, pranalinDharmapala, Markata, vali, Suciroma, Suryamitra, likewise ratnakesa, mahapranalin,Nakula. kamasrestha. Candana, nagayana, haimavata, likewise Satagiri-all these willgive protection to those to whom this sutra is dear (tesm raksam karisyanti yesam sitram idumiyam)."19)(Summarized translation) [itmust be noted here again that those who are giveprotection are those to whom the suy is dear, not the preachers or the holders of the sny.1/erse47ad4navatapta, lord of the nagas, likewise sagara, Mucilinda, elapatraNanda and upanandaka, with hundreds of thousand of Nagas, will give them protectiotom every fear and terror."20)(Summarized translation) 【The protection by naga-lords tthose to whom the suv is dear is explained.!verse 4andbalin, Rahu, Namuci, vemacitra, Samvara, prahlada, Kharaskandha,and likewise other lords of the asuras, with hundreds of thousand of asuras, will give thenrirotection from every fear and terror.",21)(summarized translation) ithe protection byAsura-lords to those to whom the suv is dear is explained.!verse51-haritl, mother of the bhutas, with her five hundred sons will alwaysgive them protection. canda, candalika, likewise the Yaksini candika, kunti, and kuta-danti-all these will give them protection everywhere in the four directions."(Summarized translation) The protection by bhuta-mother and yaksinis to those to whom the smv
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesinking the buddha's attainment of supreme enlightenment to the welfare of beings in the snarnaprabhasa (t.suzuki)(is dear is explained.1verse54-all the goddesses with Sarasvati and sni at their heads, the earth-god-dess, the deities of fruit, crop, and forest, river-deities and those inhabiting parks, trees, andsacred trees (caitya)-all these deities, with minds greatly rejoicing, will give protectionto those to whom the suv is dear, and will provide them with old age, good complexionstrength, glory, virtue, brilliance, and fortune. they will destroy every misfortune, wicked-ness, and bad dream."3)(Summarized translation) 【the protection by goddesses and deitiesto those to whom the suv is dear is explained. and we can notice here again that the meritsgranted to them are mundane ones such as the providing of fortune and the avoidance ofmisfortune.】
erse 59-77The earth-goddess (prthividevata), satisfied with the nectar juice (rasa)of the Suv, will cause the essence of the earth to increase. Through the hearing of the snvthe earth will become moist and produce various crops, fruits, and plants. everywhere irthis jambudvipa inconceivable naga-girls (nagakanya) will be joyful in mind, and plantinall the lotus-pools various kinds of lotuses. The lordly sun, offspring of the gods (suryen-〓-devapufra), satisfied with the suv, will shine everywhere with his endless mass of rays,and awaken the lotuses that fill the pools. everywhere he will fully and properly ripen thevarious crops, fruits, and plants. The constellations, likewise wind and rain, will come atthe proper time. there will be plenty everywhere, especially in that realm rastra) wherethe smy may be.,24)(Summarized translation) 【The earth-goddess is the chief character inChapter 18rdha-parivarta, see suzuki [207])which belongs to "the Five chapters." Thefertile earth, water supply, the sunshine, and proper rain and wind are indispensable tocrops, fruits, and plants. and all these are brought properly by the earth-goddess, Naga-girls, and the lordly su satisfied with the suv. we notice once again that the granted meriimentioned here through the hearing of the suvis plenty, thatis, mundane merit.】3.anexamination of the yaksaisraya-parivartaThe preceding chapter2(usambhaua-parivarta) is the story of the former lives of theBuddha sakyamuni. The story tells that the buddha sakyamuni was once born a cakravar-tin-king called Susambhava, and obtained supermnundane merit such as the attainment ofthe body composed of the law ie. the attainment of supreme enlightenment) by the mass ofmerits accumulated through having heard and rejoiced in the suv, and through the offer-
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSlinking the buddha's attainmentof supreme enlightenment to the welfare of beings inthe suuarnaprabhas. suzuk)ings to the Three jewels originated in the hearing of the suv. also at the beginning of thischapter〓(yaksasray-parivarta) the lord tells that the merit which cn be obtainedthrough the hearing of the suv is a supermundane one such as to come to comprehend theprofound buddha-sphere. in this respect it may seem fair to say that these two chaptersshare their context.however, most of the merits of the hearing of the suv we find actually in the discourseof this chapter22are mundane ones as follows:・divine and human pleasures (verse8)●refuge from various misfortunes (verse 10-12)・grain and blessing (verse19)・victoryin battles (verse 20-23)・protection by the various gods (verse33-53)・providing of fortune and avoidance of misfortune by goddesses and deities (verse54-58)
・plenty brought by the earth-goddess, Naga-girls, and the lordly sunverse59-77)These characteristics of the merits accumulated through the hearing of the suv arejommon to those in " the five chapters" and the devendrosamap-parivaria father thanthose in the preceding susambhava-parivarta, and we find also the same gods and god-desses are listed both in "the Five chapters" and in this chapter 22.Reconsidering thecontext among the successive eight chapters ( from "the Five chapters" to the yaksasraya-parivarta) according to what has been made clear by this examination, we can say〓whereas the chief merits aimed atin〓the five chapters" and the devendrascmy-parivarta armundane in order to obtain financial aid of kings as well as their people who want mun-dane merits, those aimed at in the susambhav-parivarta are supermundane in order to ob-tain fnancial aid also of those who want supermundane merits. howevet, in the yaksasrg〓-parivarta the chief merits aimed at are once again returned to mundane ohes."In that case what kinds of hearers or proponents are expected in the yaksusryparivcrta who through the hearing of the suy aim at obtaining mundane merits? letus ex-amine this question from three points. first, in the discourse of the yaksoscripartgthey are consistently called "those who have heard the su"" or "those to whom the suy isdear," and they are not regarded as monks or nuns holding or preaching the Smv.5) sec-ond. common characteristics have been found between " the Five chapters " and the yak-
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhistStudieslinking the buddha s attainment of supreme enlightenmenttothe welfare of beings inthe suarnaprabhasa . suzuRi)(sasraya-parivarta. Third, victory in battles is listed (verse20-23) among the expected mer-its, and plenty can be especially brought to that "realm rastra)" where the suv may be.a1these factors considered, it seems reasonable to suppose that they are, the same as in "theFive chapters," such lay people in india as kings or rulers and various kinds of people whcare governed by them. viewedin this light we can say that " the transition or the recurrenceof the merits aimed at from supermundane to mundane" in the yaksasraya-parivarta givesus some suggestionof what lay people in india expected ofor wanted from buddhism.what draws our attention more is that the su links the buddha's attainment of thebody composed of the law to the welfare of beings. The preceding chapter21usambhawa-parivarta) is, as has been mentioned above, the story of the former lives of the buddh:Sakyamuni, which tells that the buddha sakyamuni had obtained his supreme enlighten-ment and attained the body composed of the law by the merits originating in the hearingof the suv. in this chapter 22,however, the body composed of the law attained throughthe hearing of the smuis enshrined in the stupa whose nature is the law, that is, in the suvitself. in other words, the suv is regarded not only the origin of supreme enlightenmentbut also that which encloses the result or the outcome finally attained through the merits ofthe hearing of the suv. Therefore in the transition from Chapter2 chapter 22, we catnotice following two kinds ofshift:・from the attainment of the body composed of the law to the immanence of that bodyin the uv
・from supermundane merits to mundane meritsThese two shifts illustrate well that mundane merits of the hearing of the suy originatein the supermundane merit of the buddha's attainment of supreme enlightenment.as has been already discussed elaborately in the previous studies, ) the attainment ofsupreme enlightenment by the buddha sakyamuni has been inseparably linked in the his-tory of buddhism to the welfare of all sentient beings, and this linkage has long influencedthe formation of the various ideas in buddhism. Shifting our eyes to the smy, we see thatthe compilers of the smy maintained in the context of chapter21and chapter 22mundanemerits of beings originate in the buddha's attainment of supreme enlightenment, the ulti-mate supermundane merit in buddhism. Thus it follows that the compilers of the suv.while paying attention to the wishes of lay people in india, did not indiscriminately propa-gate the abundance of the merits of those who had heard the suv. but by considering the
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieslinking the buddha's attainment of supreme enlightenment to the welfare of beings in the suparnaprabhesa T.uzukIattainment of supreme enlightenment by the buddha sakyamuni to be the origin of thewelfare of beings they succeeded in placing the suy properly in the orthodox formula ofbuddhism concerning the linkage between the buddha's attainment of supreme enlighten-ment and the welfare of beings.4.conclusion
In order to survive in the indian religious world by obtaining various kinds of aid fromthe kings as well as their people, the compilers of the suv edited such chapters as "the fiveChapters" whose subject is to attain mundane merits. in editing them they introduced a lotof features which had been rather utusual for the buddhist scriptures before. but the com-pilers of the suv succeeded in introducing those features without having disturbed the tra-ditional idea or deviated from the orthodox formula of buddhism since the attainment ofsupreme enlightenment by the buddha sakyamuni is, in accordance with the buddhist tra-dition, inseparably linked to the welfare of all sentient beings in the suv. here may lie oneof the feasons why the sup has femained a budchist scripture through all the stages of itsformation and transmission, howevet much the compilers of the sv emphasized the at-tainment of mundane merits, and however many features they introduced into the smwhich had been rather unusulal for the buddhist scriptures at that tine.notes
5)the s,has 78verscs. in the suv, and the sma pause between verse 77and78 is indis-tinnct.
6)These translations (either full or suminarized) are mainly based o emmerick[19theSitra of golenlight: beiranslation ofthe suvarnabhusoftamasutra, pts).25)The previous studies listed inn.1 illustrate that the smv was held and preached by monks opreachers who belonged to buddhist monasteries.26)See nishio [194],takasaki [19,1974,and1975], and suzuki [07]n japanese).The other notes had to be omitted for lack of space.(This research was supported in part by japan society for the promotion of science, grant-in-aidfor scientific research (c),19520053,2009.(Key words>金光明最勝王經・金光明經(suvarnaprabhasottamasutrendrarojio),諸天薬叉護持品・鬼神品(yaksasraya-parivarta), The intention of the compilers otthe suwarnaprabhosa.(professor. yamaguchi prefectural university, d.litt.)
