The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesA studyof Sjieyi四解依in the anbam shouyi jing t602and the newly-Found kongo-jianban shouyi jingHung hung-lungIntroduction
previously  journul of indicm ad budlhist studies#118)i have discussed the issue ofthe " siiieyi四解依,Four abilities of unhindered understanding and expression cuh-pra-tisamvid)"(hereafter cp) in the newly-found "anbon shouyi jing" (hereafter k-abSYj),andthe relationship between k-abSYJ and yinchiru jing (hereinafter Ycrj).In what followswe are going to fully analyze the possibility of a corresponding relationship betweenK-abSY J and taisho tripitaka no.oshuo d cnban shounyi jing (hereinafter dbSYj)regarding 〓p", and interpret their meaningswhat buddhist system do the cPbelong to ?In the Pali language system of Theravada buddhism, whether in the scriptures of Sutraor abhidharma, the cp always appearin the sequence of yi ・fa  ci・bian(義・法・詞・辯).In the chinese language system of the mahayana, they also appear in the sequence of義・法・詞・辯,but such a sequence is found only in a very few scriptures of Sutra. in Ma-hayana abhidharma, they always appearin the sequence of fa ・ yi ・ci・bian(法・義・詞・辯).based on this rule of thumb. we can infer that the "cp"belongs to the mahayana trip-itaka system.doesdbSyJ really correspond with k-bSYj?The paragraphs that cover 〓 are not very distinctivein bsyj, but through thecomparison with k-abSYj, we still cn see that there exists a certain corresponding rela-tionship between these two scriptures. From the text sequences in these two scriptures, we〓an learn that there exist cotresponding relationships amnong the four paragraphs of 〓-matha-vipassana止觀""yatha va suriyo udoyamto譬如日出"" viia-vimutti明解〓",and
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesstudyof sijieyi四解依inthe anban shouyi jing t602andthe newy-found kongo-j amen shouyijing (H. hunc)(157"四解依(cp)"as follows.K-bSYabSY
止觀219ff～221f 〓602,p.6c23～26譬如日出222ff～223ff t602,p.169a4～6明解〓226ff～230ff no existing四解依230ff～24f〓602,p.169a9～b3as you can see from the above table, there is no paragraph elaborating "ming jie tuo明解〓"indabSYj, the corresponding paragraph mainly elaborates "hui jie tuo慧解〓(pannavimutti)""yi jie tuo意解〓(cetovimutti) " ande畫亦〓2)(via ca vimuti ca)". webelieve that, due to its being a comparatively complicated concept of buddhist practice, anShigao therefore left out " ming jie tuo明解〓"ibSYJ.Analysis the cPik-bSYFirstly, let us analyze the contents of "si iie yi四解依"in k-abSYJ. tThe four para-graphs are quite distinctive and clearin the original texts.法解(法無礙解)230ff～232ff利解(義無礙解)233ff～236ff分別投解(詞無礙解)236ff～239ff辯才博解(辯無礙解)240ff242fHere, let us review the opening text of each paragraph of"四解依".we discover thatthere exists a fixed pattern of usage, ie. the issue of the so-called "fixed pattemn sentence""〓abSYj, at the beginning of each paragraph, the words " cong di從請"were used, butin k-abSYj, "biru ying you di彼如應有諦"and "biru you di彼如有諦"have been used10and17times respectively. from the petakopadesa we can find that the two words 〓nuyou如有"correspond to the pali yathabhuta. The word "di諦"in both"從諦"andc彼如有請"should bear the same meaning as the word "di諦(ariya-sacca)" of "si di四諦(cattari ariyasaccani)". therefore there exists a corresponding relationship between"從諦"and"彼如(應)有諦",or we could say that the two words "ru you如有"were omittedwhen the version was changed fromk-abSYj to dabSYj.Firstly, let us analyze the first sentence regarding "fa jie法解"that appears in k-ab-SYj"從世間法行有亦法世間著".in "qi chu san guan jing七處三觀經3)",the corre-sponding word of "shi jian zhe世間著"inpali is bhavayogo4). the meaning of the whole
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies8)astudyof sjieyi四解依inthe anbam shouyi jing t02andthe newlyfound kongo-ii aban shomi jing h. Hung)sentence is: to practice good dharma in the mundane world, and there is also some (non-good) dharma attached to the mundane world. In the "shi fa fei fa jing是法非法經"trans-lated by  Shigao, the word anudhammacori was translated into "sui fa xing隨法行",therefore we can infer that the term〓法行"holds water.Next, let us look at the first sentence regarding"利解"appearing in the second para-graph:"從本生有亦從本因縁著".the meaning of the whole sentence is: everything aris-es from conditions, and some are attached to the dharma of interdependent arising. inYcri,we can also find the term "ben sheng本生2)7.its counterpart in pali is paticcasamuppd-〓, which also means interdependent arising. in the "ben xiang yi zhi jing本相猗致經"translated by  Shigao, we can also find the term ben yin yuan本因縁〓".its counterpartin pali is idappacc which means " the conditions of these" and it means interdependent arising too.as statedibhidharmamahavibhosasastra阿毘達磨大毘婆沙論(hereinafter dppsL)"宣説縁性縁起等理…是勝義諦9)"(in his teaching, buddha preached the principle of the con-ditions and interdependent arising etc… . " it is within the domain ofultimate truth), we canlearn thatthe contents of "li jie利解"belong to the ultimate reality (paramartha).Frombhidharmamyayanusarasastra阿毘達磨順正理論(hereinafter SZLL)又達世俗勝義二諦。名初二無礙解〓0)meant "reaching to the worldly reality and ultimate reali-ty", which is called the initial two unhindered understandings. clearly understanding theworldly reality and ultimate reality is the so-called unhindered understanding of dharmaand its internal meaning, we can lear that "fa jie法解"means worldly reality, while "liie利解"means " interpreting ultimate reality". allin all, the "fa jie法解"and "lijie利解'in k-abSYjis corresponding to " unhindered understanding of dharma法無礙解(dharmg-pratisamvid)"(hereafter dp) and "unhindered understanding of the internal meaning義無礙解(artha-pratisamvid)"(hereafter ap) of the cp mentionedinabhidharma. the " fen bie toui1e分別投解"and"已若有名・解知是法・…如有投説(if the name is designated, and welso understand its meaning- we then cnexplain itto others by verbal or written language when nec-ssary )" are equivalent to"既正知名次尋其義11)"as mentioned in SZl. The sentence正知義已欲為他説means "once we accurately learn its name and form, we then have tofind out what is the ultimate reality lying behind it. after we gain the true understanding,we will feel like to let other people know through verbal or written languages". The temtou shuo投説"means explaining to others. Therefore this paragraph is referring to"詞無
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesystudy of siieyi四解依inthe anban shoui jng t602andthe newy-found kongoji anbam shouyi jing (h. hunG)礙解unhindered understanding of terms (nirukti-pratisamvid)"(hereafter np).In the fourth paragraph"辯才博解"in k-abSYj, we can find the text"從慧慧知・慧慧成・從慧慧解".from the text"三智即前三無礙解・即縁三種無礙智・名第四無凝解12)(The three wisdoms are refeming to the first three wisdoms of unobstructed understanding,and based on the first three unobstructed understandings the wisdom thus established is called thefourth unobstructed understanding) mentionedin sZlL. we can learn that the"畫慧知・慧慧成・慧慧解"ink-abSYj is equivalent to the first three unobstnucted understandings thatgive rise to the "unhindered understanding of explanation pratibhana-pratisamvid) "(hereaf-ter Pp),in other words, the wisdom ofpp contains three parts of wisdoms. They are thewisdom of understanding the wisdom of dp, the wisdom of achieving the wisdom of apand the wisdom of comprehending the wisdom of nP. therefore itis obvious that the con-tent covered in this paragraphis about pp.comparisonof the cPbetween k-bSYJ ad dbSy.Based on the sequence of texts, dabSYj can be divided into five major paragraphs.The first13) and the third paragraphs4)are equivalent to"法解"(dp) that interpret k-ab-SYj. The second paragraph1)is equivalent to"利解"(ap) . but the sentence"法正者謂道法"in the second paragraph belongs to the contents of the first paragraph. the fourth par-agraph) is equivalent to"辯才博解"(PP).the fifth paragraphis equivalent to"分別投解"(nP).Following table shows the corresponding relationship between k-bsYj and〓abSYj regarding "p".四解依(四無礙解cp)k-abSYjabSY法解(法無礙解dp)230ff～232ff〓602,p.16a9-14;169a19-22利解(義無礙解ap)233ff～236ff〓602,p.16-1分別投解(詞無礙解np)236ff～239ff〓602,p.169b1-3靜才博解(辯無礙解pp)9240ff～242ff〓602,p.16a22-b1First let us try to understand the term"法解"(dp)in abSYj. we can approach thisissue from the keywords"念法","意著","法中",and"所念".The term"念法mindful-ness of the dharma" is referring to道(buddhism dao) that meditates on the inner dharma(the pure dharma of the mind) or"萬物all phenomena" that meditate on outer phenomena(material desire) .The term"意著18)"means "rest your mind upon","法中"means"道法〓19)(following the dharma of dao)"or " mindful of the dao (mindful or thinking of the way to
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies)astudyof sijieyi四解依inthe anban shouyi jing t602and the newly-found kongo-i anbam shoupi iing (h. hung.ultimate reality)". thoughin a broad sense"所念"means the obiect that the mind thinks of,here it means"有所念the things that one thinks of". However in abSYj,"有所念thethings that one thinks of" bears a negative implication. e.g."有所念為罪〓0),it is a fault ifone's mind is being held up by any kind of obiect". Therefore"意著法中"means to restyour mind upon the places that are in association with buddhism dao, while"意著所念*belongs to the dharma of cyclic birth and death which is not in association with buddhismdao. in any event, the text"世間法行…法世間著"in k-abSYJbears a coresponding re-lationship with the text"意著法中…意著所念"idbSYJ. it is very likely that an Shi-gao made use of the word"意" from the dabSYJ sutra's title"安般守意"to replace theterm"世間"ink-abSYJ. in doing so, he made the passage easier to explain.Next, let us examine the contents of"利解"(ap)inabSYJ. The keywords in thetext are"本起・本著意".we can also find the term"本從起21)"iYcRJ. we can learnfrompetakopadesa that it bears the same meaning as"本起".its Pali counterpart is patic-casamuppuda, which also means arising from conditions. The term"著意〓a) means tha1your mind is attached to something. Therefore we can say that the phrase"本生…本因縁著"ink-abSYj was originally coiresponding with the phrase"本起…本著意"indab-SY. They both indicate "the dharma of dependent arising〓 attached to the dharma of de-pendent arising縁起法…於縁起法面起執著".but during the Eastemn an dynasty whenBuddhism was initially introduced to china, it would be a big challenge to talk directlyabout"縁起法the dharma of dependent arising". Therefore n Shigao resorted to a sim.pler way, and he replaced the term"縁起dependent arising" with"心"or"意",both mean"mind".
The statement"皆本從意起・便著意・便有五陰・所起意當斷・斷本・五陰便斷*meant: "all the occurrences of cyclic birth and death originate from the mind. due to theattachment of the mind, the five aggregates arise. Therefore we should eradicate all thethoughts of the mind. if we ca eradicate the root of the deluded mind, the five aggregatescan also be eradicated." Such interpretations not only meet the uppermost principle of"意"as the title"安般守意"indicates, but also avoid the trouble of interpreting the tetm"dependent arising".Now let us examine the paragraph regarding"分別投解"in dabSYj. this paragraphis comparatively short, and its contents have a close relationship with Y).if we com-pare k-abSYJ with dbSYj. we can also find there exist the cotresponding terms and
The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSAstudyofsiieyi四解依inthe anbam shongi jng t602andthe newly-found kongo-j amban shouyi jing (h. hung)(16phrase regarding"分別投解"between these two scriptures. The word"正"here refers tosammapanna, ie.s正智"iother words, the totally correct wisdoms. therefore we can seethat this paragraphinbsYjis to serve the purpose ofexplaining分別投解"ink-ab-SYJ.
DabSYjk-abSY
見陰受可見若陰
有入若入
正者若從正
Themeaning of suo ・ben・ zheng(所・本・正)ofdbsYFinally let us examine the paragraph that concerning"辯才博解"(pp).we can tell themain significance of this paragraph from the following two terms:"所本正"and"道説".From dabSYj and k-abSYj we can see that"所本正"actually represents the three con-cepts of"法解"〓利解"and"分別投解".the following table shows theit correspondingrelationship:〓abSYk-bSY
所所念・所行・所起意所在
本本起・本著意・斷本本生・本因縁著正受正・自正・正心從正
Though there are some explanations according to whichan Shigao was making use ofTaoist concepts (ge-yi格義)in interpreting the meaning of the original text in k-absYjand its countetpartindabSYj, fron the table above we can see that each of the threewords"所・本・正" represents the contents ofthe three paragraphs which are concetning"法解"(dp),"利解"(ap) and"分別投解"(np)in sequence respectively. it is the sameas the contents of the fourth paragraph"辯才博解"(pp)of k-absYj. inside the辯才博解paragraph, the three terms of慧慧知・慧慧成・慧慧解mean the first three unhin-dered understanding. as mentioned, the wisdoms of the first three unobstructed understand-ings give rise to the wisdom of"辯無礙解"(pp).This shows that the paragraph of"所本正"is elaborating the contents of pp. moreover, in the paragraph of"辯才博解"indab-SYj, there is another term"道説",which can be traced to the phrase"辯無礙解縁道及〓4)i dppsl. The original meaning of"道及説"is that, no matter what kind of situation, the pp is always in association with meditation and wisdom. and thus the unhindered
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS2)astudyof stieyi四解依inthe anan shouyi ing t62and the newlv-found kongo-i abam shoni iing . hung)rhetorical abilities are gained. together with the evidence of"所本正"and"道説",it clearlydemonstrates that this paragraph fromdbSYjis actually interpreting the meaning of thepp.
Conclusion
The discussions of〓四解依"appearing in k-abSYJ and dabSYj are both very diffi-cult to understand. but from understanding of the doctrine of "catuh-pratisamvid" as elab-orated inabhidharma and the fesults of the keyword analysis for these two scriptures, anobvious corresponding relationship between the two scriptures can be shown. That is tcsay: the contents of"p'"iabSYj are actually used to interpret the original text ofと四解依"in k-abSYJ. Thougha Shigao adopted some explanations that employed taoistconcepts(格義)to let the people of his time gain a better understanding, we still cn seethat the original structure of 〓p"indabSYJis almost identical to that of k-abSYJ. Thisallows us to be mote certain that both k-bSYj and dabSYj are works by an Shigao,and that the relationship between them also represents the relationship between"小安般經"and"大安般經".
(Key words) n Shigao, anban Shouyi jing, sjjieyi四解依,abhidharmaAssistant prof. dharma drum buddhist college, taIwanN)
