The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesNotes on the authorship and dating of the13〓century henmyoindaishi myoiingo tukusen ki (attributed to dohan)Elizabethn. TinSLeY1)along-running dispute between the monks affiliated with kongobuii and those withdaidenboin at mount koya(高野山)culminated in an arson attack by some kongobuji monksi ninji 3(1242).the resulted in the1243exile of around26kongobuii monks includingthe high-ranking monk dohan(道範)(1178-1252).The accounts ofthis incident most commonly consulted appear in the edo period sources koy shuniu, kii zkuudoki andhyakurensho. two historically significant, but heretofore largely overlooked, mentions ofthe disturbance which can be dated most contemporaneously to its occutrence are foundinhenmyoiaishi yoiingo takuseni(遍明院大師明神御託宣記)1)(hereafter t1251)attributed to dohan, and some comments by koya monk Yukai(看快)(1345-1416ia-egawa lakus hu ki(阿互川薬草中記(c.14132)dohan gives a brief account of the1242incident in his exile diary, vankai ruroki(南海流浪記)but a more detailed account is foundink, a record ofan oracle apparently wit-nessed and recorded by dohan after his return from exile. The account of the arsonfexileoccupies the first 1-13 articles. This is followedby the oracle which occupies the main partof the text. Yukai's is the next mention closest in date to the incident. he comments on thedating, authorship, and production of tk. it should be emphasized that the account founditk is an esoteric exegetical account characteristic of koya's scholarly texts of the tirnewhereas Yukai's remarks are skeptical and historicizing. however, while a commparison ofthese two approaches is of interest, my objective here is to use the texts to raise problemsregarding the productionof tk.2)The conventional dating of 1251is largely based on two statements of the date incopies of the text itself. however the first refers only to the oracle, and the second dateshe oath kishomon) certifying the veracity of the content. Regarding authorship, it is cer-tainly a kongobuii-affiliated work. it is attributed to dohan, or dohan and fellow exile
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesNotes on the authorship and dating ofthe13cenury henmyom daishi myoi go taksen ki (atributed to dohan)(. Tnsley)(169)hosho. dohan's name appears within the text, at the end of a list of five signatories of theoath.
however, neither figure stands up to scrutiny as recorder. hosho's name appears no-where in the Tk. Furthermore, had he died during exile, as dohan records in his diary,hosho would not have been alive in25to participate. it is possible that Hosho's namnecame to be linked with dohan's by virtue of their simultaneous exiles, or alternatively, thatthe oracle had occurred before the exiles, which Yukai suggests. he speculates that the ex.ile occurcd soon after the oracle. hence that the record was made between-1243門云伝法院破壊由来何事乎師云或説邪流在之取焼失之也是則愛染王内護摩以火焼之也託宣記見云云此説少難心得其故法性道範等託宣記記者也依伝法院訴訟被流罪也知此御託宣伝法院壊以前也爾者此説有疑但伝法院破壊後御託宣有其後法性道範等被流罪歟随初随分寺僧計被流罪而伝法院為損本寺学匠撰流罪訴訟見仍伝法院破壊之後有中間法性等被流罪歟
However, the exile account prefaces the oracle record. Thus, i suggest that the exile ac-ount was written not by dohan or hosho, but by a monk at koya after the exiles, and thatthe oracle record ( regardless of when it occurred and its record made) and the account of the in-cident were later joined. if so, the account can be said to be reflective of the atmosphere onthe mountain directly following the violence and not after the conflict had (to an extent)been resolved and the two parties reconciled (which provides the context for the conventionalexplanation of the production of the text).3)iwill focus on the arsonfexile account. First, the writer suggests why dohan's exilelocation was Zentsuji:一,正智院道範阿闍梨,讃赤下向ハ,大師明神之御計也.大師之御誕生所之故,別被下當国也.善通寺興行料歟
dohan would have been unlikely to speculate about this himself, especially after returningto koya. Second, there is a reference to the presence of bushi which seems to have beenwrittenby someone at koya during the exiles.一,寺僧,為配流被召出之時,内ニハ諸神影向天,番々令守護給.外ニハ武士馳上天.日夜警固之間,大師明神之御威光,弥増.Finally, the authority of kongobuji permeates the account. although kongobui monks hadbeen exiled, the writer expresses himself with the consciousness of the victorious. Most
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist studies170) notes on the authorship and dating ofthe13 century henmyoin daisi yoigo Tahsenki atibuted to dohan)(. TnslEy)significantly, there is no sense whatsoever that any reconciliation had taken place. Yet it isthought thatin1248,a condition for the return of the kongobuji exiles was the granting ofpermission to daidenboin to reconstruct their buildings.4) nor is there any recognition thatthe exiles had retumned as would be expected had dohan, the returned exile, written the ac-count himself. here, for example, the writer condemns the daidenboin monks to suicide:一,院僧,於當山者,雖有彼此,各別妄執於他所者,号高野法師.仍,一偏不可悪之,施恩愍之上,致梟心者自害歟一,此記,令清書,入印信箱,不可出當院遍明院.加判五人之内,不審之時者,来當院可一見.但,正智院計ハ,取寄テ加一見給テ,後日之内ニ早々可送當院給.it may be suggested that the account and perhaps the oracle record itself were writtendown by a certain kakuson(覚尊),about whom, unfortunately, vety little is known. Thereare many references to kakuson within the oracle record. his name is first on the list ofkishomon names. he was probably resident at henmyoin, where the oracle had occurred.Evidence to support this is a mention in the Edo period record kongobuji shoinke SekifiShu金剛峰寺諸院家析負輯that he was head priest ( from1275-78).too, the text was theproperty of henmyoin as stated in the kishomon. here it is ruled that monks could view itthere but not take it away. dohan (referred to here as "shochiin")was permitted to take i1away to peruse, but only for a single day:It seems unlikely that, were dohan the writer, he would impose such a restriction on him.self. Finally, the oracle itself seems to have been related in some sense to a previous headpriest (sendoku) of henmyoin. the opening line of TK mentions the sendoku, while thekongobuii shoinke Sekitiu shu refers to the oracle in its sectionon priest kyomitsu, statingthat the medium, while possessed, had proclaimed his name as being "kyomitsu, the send-oku". moreover, the eiji(1323)copy calls the record that of the sendoku kyomitsu.other accounts of the oracle state that it was delivered in order to pass on teachings vitalfor confirming the legitimacy of the then head priest, kakuson's predecessor, also listed asa witness in the colophon. presumably, the oracle took place at henmyoin, for theHenmyoin priestly lineage.4)Such evidence moves identification of the writer away from dohan, but regardlessof whether or not kakuson was the recorder of the oracle and of the arsonfexile section, itseems reasonable to suggest that the latter was written by someone other than dohan, who
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist studiesjotes on the authorship and datimg oftelcetmy henmom dais moj go thasen ki (attributed todohan)(. TnsLFy)(171)was at koya during the exiles' absence. based on this alternative theory of production,uggest that one aspect of the text's significance is in its attempt to provide a religious in-terpretation of human violence within a community in order to consolidate it in the after-math of destruction and unrest.1)Iuse the text reconstructed from copies by abe Yasuro阿部泰郎(chusei koyasam engi nokenkyl中世高野山縁起の研究,(Gangoji bunkazai kenkyusho,1983),pp.104-112.2)Iuse the textin hisshu gakuho密宗学報25,1915,pp.111-128.the mentions regarding takuren ki are foundon page 1223)anumber of copies give kenji 3 (1277),suggestedby abe as being a copyist's error.4)koyasan monio8高野山文書documents no.1809 and1810. tokyo, tokyo teikoku daigaku1904-1907,p.164-165.See also kushida ryoko櫛田良洪shingon mikkyo seiritsu kateino ker-kyu真言密教成立過程の研究sankibo busshorin, Tokyo,1964-1979,p.446-7.5)abe also raises doubt as to dohan's authorship(1983,pp.50-51).(key words> daidenboin大伝法院,takusen託宣,dohan道範,yukai看快,kakuson覚尊(Graduate student, otani university)
