The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSdharmottara's Interpretation of the causelessness ofDestruction
SAkai Masamichi0.Introductionlt goes without saying that the new proof of momentariness systematizedby dharmak-itti1)c.600-660) determines the direction ofthe later development ofthe proofofmomen-mriness.2in this proof, the existent (sat) is defined as being causally efficacious, andthereby the lack of causal efficacy of the non-momentary aksanika) is deduced, for theway a thing produces an effect is either gradual or simmultaneous and the non-momentarycan produce its effect neither gradually nor simultaneously. Thus, itis proven by negatingthe existence of the non-monnentary that all that is existent is momentary. meanwhile, ow-ing to the appearance of the new proof, the traditional proof of momentariness foundedupon the causelessness of destruction vinasasya-ahetutva) was moved outside the main-stream proofs for momentariness. in this traditional proof whose object of application isrestricted to the produced (krtaka) and which always requires the impermanence (amipyatua)of the produced as its presupposition, itis only possible to infer momentariness of the pro-duced fromn its impermanence by virtue of the causelessness of destruction. Therefore, inthe traditional proof, the ascertainment of the pervasionvyaptiniscaya) of the property ofbeing produced (kyrtakatua) by the property of being impermanent (anityatua) is not the top-ic in the first place. on the contrary, in the new proof not only the momentariness itself,but also the pervasion of the property of being existent (satta) by the property of beingimpermanent or being momentary (ksanikatva) is established. Therefore, from the logicalpoint of view, it may be no exaggeration to say that the appearance ofthe new proof makesthe existence of the traditional proof completely superfluous. in spite of this fact, however,in the actual history of indian buddhism, the traditional proof never disappeared. one pos-sible reason for this can be found in the activities of dhatmakirti's successors. for example, dharmottara (c.740-800) is engaged in the traditional proof in a unique way. That is,
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies) dharmottara's lnterpretation of the causelessness of destruction m. SAka1)he places the causelessness of destruction, which is the very backbone of the traditiona.proof, in the framework of the new proof and thereby gives it a new function. The aim ofthis paper is to introduce one interpretation, unique to dharmottara, of the causelessness ofdestruction by focusing on the argument that appears in an independent work of his, theksanabhangasiddhi (henceforth: kbhs) with the great help of muktakalasa's ca.100)commentary the ksanabhaigasiddhivivarana (henceforth: kbhSv).1.obiection of the opponentInkbhs, dharmottara's unique interpretation appears in the course of the discussionwhere he confronts a very distinctive objection of (an) opponent (s). The following is theoutline of the opponent's assertion(1)what the opponent asserts is that the logical reason(hetu) "being existent (sattua)" characterized as having the nature of being causally effica-cious, from which the momentariness is infeired, is inconclusive (anaikuntika) because theexclusion of this logical reason from the dissimilar vipaksa) is doubtful.(2) namely, evenhe non-momentary can produce an effect gradually by depending on a gradually cooperat-ing cause (schakurin). Therefore, the non-momentary is causally efficacious ahd hence carbe considered existent.(3)In order to illustrate this theory by an example rstanta) ofsuch acooperating cause, the opponent points to a hammer as a cause of destruction (vinas-ahetu ), according to the opponent, there is a certain similarity between the causes of de-struction and the cooperating causes that the non-momentary fequires when it produces itseffect, that is, "to do nothing akimcitkara) to a material cause (upadana)." The opponenthinks according to the following schema.aon-momentary thing as material causoperatig cause〓produce an effectIn this case, however, a cooperating cause does not do anything to a material cause, namely, it nei-ther gives superiority in quality (atisaya) to a material cause nor does it refine (ama-terial cause so that it produces an effect.Apot as material cauehammeidisappearIn this case, however, a hammer does not do anything to a pot, namely, it neither gives superioritnquality to a material cause nor does itrefine a pot so that it disappears.(4)Moreover, according to the opponent, one must not say that a hammer is not a cause ofdestruction of a pot because it does not do anything to a pot, because destruction ofa potfollows the presence and absence of a hammer.(5)in order to exemplify this theory, theopponent gives a further example, that is, the causal relation between seed and sprout. the
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesopponent thinks as follows: although a seed does not refine a sprout so that it arises, asprout is subject to the existence and non-existence of a seed. Therefore, a seed can becalled the cause of a sprout, in the same way that it can be said: although a hammer doesnot refine a pot so that it disappears, destruction of a pot is subject to the existence andnon-existence of a hammer. Therefore, a hammer is a cause of destruction. Thus, it isproven that just like the fact that a pot disappears in dependence on a hammer, even thenon-momentary produces its effect dependent on acooperating cause. Therefore, the logi-cal reason "being existent"" is a pseudo-reason that is inconclusive, for the exclusion fromthe dissimilar is doubtful. That is the assertion of the opponent.2.New function of the causelessness of destructionanswering this obiection in the kBhs, dharmottara rebuts this attack of the opponenconcerning the logical reason "being existent" by rejecting the cause of destruction as anexample of a cooperating cause. muktakalasa comments upon this very negation of thecause of destructionby dharmottara as followsIn order to prove the logical reason "being existent"] conclusive, [dharmottara, ] aiming to refutehe cause of destruction as the example brought up by the opponent, repeats [the above-mentionedopponent's objection] with the words "as has been said."… just as soil in case of the seed ofrice,the pot cannot depend on a thing as a cause of destruction. Therefore, a pot is unestablished as theexample of [the theory] that a thing as a cooperating cause is, though it does not do anything to amaterial cause, needed [by it]. hence, that which is explained by a example(*arstanta) isunestablished. Therefore, the statement concerning the inconclusiveness [of the logical reason oftbeing existent"] that even the non-momentary can be an agent [that produces an effect] gradualls pulled up(*uddhyta)by its roots(*smulam), and that is the content of this treatise (iekbhs) in totality.)This means that, when dharmottara negates the cause of destruction as an example of a co-operating cause, his rejecting the cause of destruction is motivated by the special aim ofproving that the logical reason "being existent" is conclusive (aikuntika). In other words,when dharmottara negates the cause of destruction as an example and thereby proves it tobe unestablished, then the theory explained by this example, that even the non-momentary〓an produce its effect gradually by depending on a gradually cooperating cause, is alsoproven to be unestablished, since the example is unestablished drstantusiddha). accord-ingly, the critique by the opponent that the logical reason "being existent"" is inconclusive
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studies)dharmottara's interpretation ofthe causelessness of destruction (M. SakaI)is invalidated. Thus, this logical reason turns out to be conclusive.Moreover, muktakalasa makes a conclusive remark of dharmottara's argument to re-iect the cause of destruction.with the words "therefore" and so on, [Dharmottara] summarizes the purpose to which the abovementioned largumentation to reject the cause of destruction] contributes. this kind of reiection ofthe cause of destruction is [taught] by the former teachers("purvacaryaih), [and it] is taught byanother person(*parena, i.e., dharmakirti) as the principle of the proof of momentariness asfollows(*ii): "since there is no cause of destruction, destruction is connected with [things] onthe basis of [ their] nature193cd)." however (ni, *tu), for the author of this treatise (ie.,dharmottara),the strength [of this kind of rejection of the cause of destruction] should beunderstood through the very logical reason "being existent," [and this kind of reijection of the causef destruction] is brought forward [by him], in order to clear away its fault [ie. the fault that thisogical reason should be inconclusive ].6)Here, Muktakalasa is pointing out the following three important facts:(1) The notion ofthe causelessness of destruction is ascribed to the former teachers.(2)This traditional no-tion is formulated by dharmakirti as the principle of the proofof momentariness in his pv1.193cd.(3)For dharmottara, however, its value and strength should be understoodthrough the very logical reason "being existent." what is striking in this commentary ofMuktakalasa is that he calls dharmakirti not a teacher (acaryua) and so on, but merely "an-other persongzhan, * para)."3.conclusion
as observed above, for dharmottara the causelessness of destruction has the specia.role of eradicating the fault that the logical reason "being existent" is inconclusive. Name-ly, the causelessness of destruction, which is the base constituent ofthe traditional proof, isincluded in the system of the new proof and given a new function there, that is, to provethat the logical reason of the new proof is conclusive. However, dharmottara in his kbhsalso takes up the primary function of the causelessness of destruction to infer the momentariness of the produced. Therefore, his unique interpretation of the causelessness of de-struction, observed above, indicates one of its aspects indharmottara's logical system. inaddition, this interpretation is valid only against the opponent's objection in which thecause of destruction is brought up as an example of a cooperating cause, depending onwhich the non-momentary produces its effect gradually. the very same objection can be
The japanese association of Indian and buddhiStStudiesfound in his pramanaviniscayatika, second chapter, where dharmottara states that thecauselessness of destruction that has the function of refuting the cause of destruction as arexample of a cooperating cause is an assistant (parikara) to the negating valid cognition(badhakapramana) which ascertains the pervasion of the property of being existent by theproperty of being momentary.in my opinion, this unique idea of dharmottara, to inter-pret the causelessness of destruction in the framework of the new proof, is one of the goodexamples representing his originality and creativity, which made prof. Frauwallner callhim "der erste buddhistische logiker nch dharmakirti."〓*Iam obligedto prof. taiken kyima for his valuable comments and suggestions. I am also verygrateful to patrick mcallister who kindly corrected my englishNotes
1)for a detailed analysis of how dharmakirti systematizes the new proof and what the theoreticaland historical background of the new proof is, see Yoshimizu1999.2)cf. steinkellner1968376.
6.3)the above-mentioned arguments from(1)to(5appear in khs220,1-221,6For translations of this passage of the kbhs, see Ftauwallner1935237-238,and tani1997(a):24.my understanding of the contents of this objection is greatly indebted to muktakalasa's com-mentary. cf. kbhSVd23-26279b1-280a3.4)bton p e.  dp.5)kbhSV263a1-3,832-on khs225,7-11).6)kbhSV267b5-7;p288a1-3on kbhs228,24-229,10).7)cf. sakai forthcoming.8)cf. frauwallner193218.Abbreviations and literature〓 derge edition. p. peking edition. kbhs: ksamabhangasiddhi (dharmottara), ed. e. Frauwall-ner, Frauwallner 1935219-237.khSv ksanabhaigasiddhiviarana, dP5752.pv1The first chapter of the pramanavarttika, ed. R. Gnoli, rome1960pvinthe second chapter ofthe pramanaviniscaya, ed. e. Steinkellner, beijing-vienna,2007. frauwalliner193e. Frauwall-ner, "dharmottaras ksanabhangasiddhih: text und ubersetzung," wZk,42(1935),217-258.Tani1997(a)"problems of interpretationon dharmottara's "ksanabhangasiddhi"(1)."bulletinof koch national college oftechnology,41(1997),19-37in Japanese). sakai forthcoming: m.sakai, "sakyabuddhi and dhammottara on the inference of momentariness based on the absence ofexternal causes of destruction," proceedings of the Fourth internationl dharmakirti conference.vienna, august 2-27,205.steinkellner1968:e. steinkellner, "die entwicklung desksanikatvanumanam bei dharmakirti," wzks,12/13(1968/69),361-377. yoshimizu1999ch.Yoshimizu, "The development of sattvanumana from the refutation ofa permanent existentin theSautrantika tradition," wZks,43(1999),231-254<Key words> dharmottara, ksanabhangasiddhi, muktakalasa, ksanabhaigasiddhivivarana(doctoral candidate, university of vienna)
