The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudieSjournal of indicm ad budchist studies vol.58,no.3, marchdharmakirti o False Rejoinders ( juti)wataNab Toshikazu0.In his pramonavarttika, dharmakirti gives the definition of one of the jutis (false re-ioinders)1)called karyasama ( [the jati whose reason is] similar [to the reason being refuted] witespect to [being] an effect),) and explains that his refutation of the existence of god pro-posed iv212-13should not be regardedas this kind of uti. The sane verses are repeat-ed in the same order in his later work, i.c., pramanaviniscay37-72(d2171-3,p314b6-8)in the context of discussing unproved reasons (asiddha). taking dharmakirti's view of jatisinto consideration, however, itis legitimmate to assume that he had another purpose in defin-ing koryycsama inin3.72.Kitagawa [196530-305,338-342, relying onuddyotakara's nyayavarttika, pointed out that the explanation of karycsamainyayasutra5.1.37,as well as the one in the yayabhasy on this passage, do not cotrespond to the ex.planation of koryyasama given by dignaga, but rather to dignaga's explanation of somsa-ysama. in addition, krasser[20024-53]has pointed out that dharmakirti's definition ofkaryasama corresponds to dignaga's explanation but not to the definition found in the〓yayasutra. Therefore, it may seem to be the case that dharmakirti defines koryasama irorder to refute the explanationin the nS and nbh. however, a close look at these materialsreveals that dharmakirti gives the definition of karyasama in response to uddvotakara's in-terpretation which plays an important role in the controversy between the buddhist and theNyaya understanding of karyasama. in this paper i will examnine dharmakirti's view of j-tis, and then try to clarify the historical background of his definition of karyasama.1. dharmakirti does not devote much space to the topic of jati. he summarizes his view o1jdtisinvin.85refutationusana) consists in refeming to the lack [of any of the three characteristics of a validreason (trirupa)and so on.4on the contrary, jatis are what are seemingly like them tdubha-s). because false ripostes (mithyottora, ie., jati ) are infinite [in number ], they are not demon-
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies)dharmakirtioFalse rejoinders ( jati) (t. watanabstrated here (i.e, in pvin).after defining jatis in general, dharmakirti clearly states that there is no need to pive anexplanation of the respective kinds of jutis because it is possible to conceive new kinds ofjatis without limit. previous buddhist logical treatises, however, enumerate 16o1kindsof jatis, and even though dignaga refers to their infinite numbers due to various formula-tions (prayoga),〓 he, too, refers to1 kinds of jatis. in his nyayavorttika on nS5.1.6, ud-dyotakara criticizes dignaga's view in this regard. Even though uddyotakara also acceptsthat there are an infnite numnber of iatis ifthe various formulations are taken into consider-ation, he insists that there is no feason for eithef reiecting the nyaya's classification into24kinds, or for proving dignaga's classification. as a response to this objection, dharmakirti discards the classification of jatis and adopts only the infinity of their number frordignaga's theory.2.nevertheless, dharmakirti defines koryasama invin3.72.it is thus likelythat there is another putpose for this verse in additionto showing the appropriateness of hiscriticism of the proof of the existence of God, because these arguments could be supportedwithout defining karyasama. to clarify the additional purpose, it is necessary to comparethe explanation of koryasama and ssaysama according to the buddhist and nyayaviews.
2.1.In the case of samsayasama, the following arguments are presupposed:sound is inpermanent, because it exists iimmediately after an effott, such as a pot. (anitych sb-lh, prayatnanantariyakaruat, ghatapat. )InS5.1.14. samsaycsama is defined as follows:samsayasama [is adduced by the opponent] based on the similarity [of the subject of the thesis(paksadhcrmin), ie., sound] with both a permanent and an impermanent object when perceptibili-y is common to both, a universal amunya) [s a permanent object, ie., vaidharmyadrstonta〓and the example [put forward by the proponent as an impermanent object, e.g. a pot, i.e., 〓-harmpadrstanta].8)〓n the other hand, dignaga defines itinv)6.18ab as follows.to cast a doubt on [ the validity] of the reason by [assuming ] a different meaning [ from what isintended by the proponent] is [the jati] called samsay [sa].(PS6.18ab)[The opponent would say that] the reason [put forward by the proponent] is doubtful because,
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieswhen the [ different] meaning of the thesis or the [different] meaning of the reason is assumed, theeason [put forward by the proponent] would deviate [ from what is to be proved].according to dignaga, in the case of samisayasama the doubts are raised by assuming(*kalpana) a different meaning with regard to the thesis (pratiina ) or with regard to the rea-son (hetu).by comparing these two explanations of samsayasama, the following differ-ence can be pointed out: in the case ofaksapada's defnition of samsaysamna, the oppo.nent raises the objection based on the similarity of the paksadharmin with both thesadharmyadrstanta and the vaidharmyadrstonta, while in the case of dignaga's definitionof samsaycsama the opponent raises the objection based on assuming a different meaningof the thesis or the reason.2.2.next, we turn to the explanation of kuysama. in this case, the arguments presup-posed by the nyayas and buddhists are as follows:nyaya soundis impermanent, because it exists innmnediately after an effort, such as a pot. (anipyahsabdah, prayatnanantariyakatuat, ghatavat.)Budchist: sound is impermanent, because it is an effect, such as a pot. (anityah sabdah, koryatvopoasyhembsotaesesblinusier i ksnosa.isns he mgucenssi(or kytakatvat ), ghatoyat.)The definition of karyasamain nS5.1.37is as follows.karyyasama [is adduced by the opponent] based on the variety of the effects ofefforts.vatsyayana gives a more detailed information about the objection raised by the opponent.production immediately after an effort is seen among pots, etc. on the other hand, manifestationimmediately after an effort is seen] among concealed things when their obstacles are removedTherefore, there is no particular reason [to decide] whether sound is produced immediately aftetm effort, or [whether itis] manifested [immediately after an effort])In his psv)6.7abc, dignaga gives the following explanationof koryasama:karyyasama consists in showing that what is to be proved is not established based on the slight dif-ference between being a effect [of sound and that ofa pot]. (pS6.7abc)If [the following argument] is made [by the proponent, namely, that」 sound is impenmanent be-cause it is produced like a pot, [the opponent would make the following obiection:] if the effect.which proves the impermanence of the pot [in the examnple] is different [ from that of sound ], howhen could sound be [impermanent]? [This obiection is the rati called]krasama.2according to this explanation, in the ps he distinguishes between koryasama and samsa-yasama with the following point: while in the latter case, the meaning of the thesis or thereason is interpreted differently based on an assumption of the opponent, in the former case
The  ujapane Se sSOciationofIndian and buddhistStudiesthe meaning of the reason is interpreted differently based on the difference between sounc(paksadharmin) and a pot drstantadharmin). there is no decisive difference betweendignaga's explanation of karyyasama and that of the nS and nbh.2.3.however, in explaining the karyasama of the nS, uddyotakara offers the followingdiscussion.
[objection] ssayasama is not distinguished fromit (ie., karyasama).answer:] ssayasama is based on the similarity [of the paksadharmin, ie., sound] with botl(i.c., sapaksa e.g. a pot and vipaksa e.g. universal), but this (ie., koryasama) is not so. There-forc, [sasaycsama] is distinguished [from koryusamu].[objection.] sdharmyasama is not distinguished fromit (i.e., karyasuma).[answer.] this is not correct because [in the case of korycsama, a different meaning of] the reason is superimposed hy'aropa).sudharmyasaa does not occur through superimposing [a dif-erentmeaning of」 the reason, but this e., koryasama) occurs [by superimposing」 adifferent aspect (anyathakora) upon the reason expressed [by the proponent with a] different [meaning tharthat of the opponent].14)here, in differentiating karyasama fromsamsaycsmd and sadharmycsama, he mentionesthe characteristics of kuryasama. of these, the superimposition of the meaning of the reason draws our attention. Even though this characteristic is mentioned in order to differenti-ate karyyasama from sadharmyasama, it seems that both sudharmyasama and samsayasamcdo not possess this characteristic, because when he explains the differences between thesetwo jatis in his commentary onS5.1.14, this characteristic is not mentioned. as we haveseen above, on the other hand, dignaga explains that in the case of samsayasama in the ps,the proponent's original meaning of the thesis or the reasonis interpreted differently by theopponent based on an assumption. considering the case where the meaning of the reason isassumed differently, there is a similarity between dignaga's characterization of samsays-ama and uddyotakara's characterization of karyasama.1ccording to uddyotakaratherefore, it can be said that dignaga erroneously attributes the characteristic of koryasamcto samsayasama, namely, that dignaga does not differentiate between smsayasama andkrysama. and so it may be possible to consider the opponentin uddyotakara's argumen1cited above as being dignaga.〓.. or dignaga, however, unlike uddyotakara, the distinctive feature of koryasama doesnot lie in the superimposition of a different meaning on the reason. emphasizing this point,dharmakirti responds to uddyotakara's criticism by saing:
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudieswhen the effect is [regarded as] a proving property (schana) based on the concomitance withwhat is to be proved and also as being in common [between paksadharimin and drstontadharmin],[if] the difference [of the effect of sound from that of a pot] is mentioned [by the opponent」based on the difference between the relata (ie., sound and a pot), [then it is] accepted as the faultcalled] karyasama. (pvin4)Here, following the explanation of dignaga, dharmakirti again makes the point clear thatin the case of koryasama the meaning of the reason is interpreted differently based on thedifference between paksadharmin and drstantadharmin. in stating this, he tries to do awaywith uddyotakara's interpretation of korycsama.3.dharmakirti states that it is not possible to define all ratis individually because they arinfinite in number. considering this view of iutis, it is clear that there must be another pur-pose in his defining koryasama inv3.72.it seems that his reason for definingthe term is related to the disagreement between dignaga and uddyotakara about the inter-pretation of kuryasama and samsayasama. as the characteristic of samsayasama, dignagaintroduces the theory that a doubt is cast on the validity of the reason because of the as-sumption(*kaipana) of the different meaning with regard to the thesis or the teason. as thecharacteristic of koryusama, however, uddyotakara advocates a similar albeit different the-oty, namely, that a doubt is cast on the validity of the reason because of the superimposi-tion adhyaropa) of a different meaning on the meaning which was originally intended. inorder to exclude this characteristic from the explanation of karyasama. dharmakirti definesthe termin accordance with dignaga's explanation〓would like to thank dr. ernst prets for valuable suggestions. i would also like to thank ms.peck-kubaczek and patrick mc allister for corecting my english.dotes: )vasubandhu, dignaga and dharmakirti paraphrase rati as dusanabhasa,' or mithyot-tuy
r.2)onthe translationofsma,' see kang [991].3)see pvinok.5(d1906-7,p88a7)tenonuktoy api paksasy sicdiher apratibandhat trisv anyatamarupcsyivo-nuktir mpyunate sadhanadosa ity uktam vedityf. Sv3.ab. atro camyatamarupamuktir nyu-natet' uktam bhavati my thanks to dr. pascale hugon for providing me the sanskrit textof pvin3,the critical edition of which is under preparation.4)according to dharmottara, 〓nyu-patoci' meas asidciho, viruddhc amd anaikuntika. see nbT2,8.5)dusano myunatoyuktih tadabhasas tu jutayah  mithyottaronom ananpyat pratamycnte na fg ih229pcda a),d225-6(paca b),d22 poc cd).cf. nB3137.139and
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist StudiesjMu k.19ab (katsura [19897-99]).6)see nMu〓11(katsura [1987:6-64]) andpv6.20d (kitagawa [1965348]).7)See NV501,10-19o nS5.1.6.8)cf.Kang [2009:91,f.].9)k(137b6-7),v (d2b5,p89b2).See nMu 1(katsura[19846-61]).10)nBh303,17-304.1. See thsi[78b-79a].11)see krasser[20024-45].12)my translation of this pSv is based on the tibetan translation of pva(d39a5,p46a3).This part lacks corresponding sanskrit text in both Sankrtyayana's edition andMs b of the Pva. However, Yamari (da7ff, p37b2ff) comments on this part. Moreover, thispart of the tibetan translation of the pvais well accorded with pratikas found ind298b2ff,P33a7ff). Therefore, it is highly possible that this section was originally patt of the pva and thatPrainakaragupta is citing it fromv6.7. For the text of the tibetan translation of the pSv andpva. see krasser [2002-6,fn.58-59].In addition, p-4i a citation fromv)6.12ab'. and note that "koryatuacuksusatvadind' in the edition 53)should be emended totpakyatvacaksusatvadina' according to the ms B(7b4).13)see nbh291,6-7onn5.1.14.14)nV515,17-516,2. See kitagawa[1965:0 and thsi3[21a]15)see kitagawa [196].16)see krasser [2022-27].abbreviations: k: (v) tr. by kanakavarman and dad pa'i shes rab,p5702.Ms B. manuscrip1Bof pva. S. watanabe ed. patna-narita 1998.nb nyayabindu. d. malvania ed. TSws2.nd ed.patna1971.nbh: nyapabhasya. a. thakur ed. new delhi.1997.bTayabindutiko. See nbNMu: nyayamukha see katsura[182],[1984],[1987].nv nyoyavarttika. a. Thakur ed. Newdelhi.1997.psv)pramanasamuccaya vrtti). See k and v. p pramanasamuccayatiku.〓4268,5766.pvramanavarttika chapter2(pramanasidchi). see krasser [2002].pvapramanavarttikulankara. sankrtyayana ed. patna,1953.pvinpramanaviniscaya chapter 3.d4211p5710.v: (v)tr.by vasudhararaksita and seng rgyal, d42,P5701.kang, SungYong20what does -ma mean-on the uniform ending of the names of the jdti-s in theNvayasutra. jiph3775-96. katsura, shoryu1982,1984,1987a study of the nyayamukha(5,(6),(7).hiroshimadaigaku bungokuu ky82-99,7,-65. kitagawa, hidenori1965: indo koten romrigaku no kenkyu. tokyo. krasser, helmut 200:sankaranandanas i-varapakaranasanksep mit einem onymen kommentar und weiteren materialienzr budchisi-ischen gottespolemik. wien. matilal, bimal krishna199 the character oflogic inidia. alba-〓y,1998.tphsi2,3: terminologie der frihen philosophischen scholastikin ndien bd.2(1996),3(2006), wien.(work on this paper has been generously supported by the austrian Science fund (FwF) in theframework of the FwF project p250-G15"tradition und wandel in der indischen buddhistischenLogik".)
<key words> dharmakirti, uddyotakara, dignaga, jati, karyasama, samisayasama(research fellow, the institute for the cultural and intellectual history of asia of the AustrianAcademy of Sciences)
