The  uapaneSe sSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies〓n the Praise of the 21Taras in the ariai cave TempleYamagucHi NarikoThe ariai cave temple is located on the ordos plateau in western inner mongolia, chi-na. The temple, which is thought to have been built at some time during the bei-wei(北魏)to ming(明)eras, consists of three parts. sumetui ariai (the arjai having a temple), yeke ar-jai (the large arjai) and baya arjai (the small arjai).among them, sumetii arjai is the mostesearched. for generations, the lords of the temple have been called 〓delub qutuytu',which is the Mongolian name for telopa (Skt. tailikapuda).as this title indicates, the tem-ple belongs to the bka' brgyud pa sect, which has heldaminor position in Mongolia ).on the inner walls of the temple3 ), more specifically on the western and eastern wallsof cave no.32, we can see the icons of the 21taras4) and the texts in praise of them writ-ten in three languages: Sanskrit, which is spelled out in lantsa characters, Tibetan andulassical Mongolian. in regard to the mongolian text, Yang (2008)has transcribed andcompared it with the text from a wood block print made in13(hereafter refenred to simplyas "1431")i beijing.1431is also a polyglot text, and its original is said to date back to thecuan(元)era〓).1431we can see sanskrit, tibetan, classical mongolian and classica.Chinese versions in praise of the21Taras, as well as icons for each of themsee Figure 1for an example).Thanks to the work of Yang (2008),the mongolian text on the walls and that of1431are now available for study. however, the Sanskrit and tibetan texts have yet to be tran-scribed and published, and Yang (2008) makes no mention of the praise contained in theMongolian kanjur).given this background, this paper reports on the comparison ofall ofthe texts on the walls with those of143as well as the textin the kaniur, and then discussesm issue pertaining to the correspondence between the texts and the icons).praise and iconsofthe 21Taras
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS〓nthe praise of the2Taras in the ariai cave temple (n. Yamaguc)with the eastern and western walls barely keeping their surfaces. as shown in Figure 2,each tara icon is drawn within a squarc formed with bold lines. on these " frames' isplaced the polyglot text (Figure 3).The main tara (the green tara) to the thtara appearon the western wall, and the qth to the 17thtaras on the eastern wallNow, taking some parts of the polyglot text on the walls as examples, i will comparethem with the13and kaniur texts. The parts marked by underline ate the texts seen othe walls9),
Skt.Mong.
Mong.
m ncmcs tcre tuye vire tuttare bhavanasane〓 u
(nusane)  fure sarvarthadature svahdkarenamo stute f
puban cay-un burqad-un ulcsIbutuigegcitar-a eke (noku) d-yenfren soyurqeamo stute tuibanu burqad-un iuiles1butugegciThese texts are found around the icon of the main tara on the western wall. where most ofthe tibetan texts pertaining to it have been lost. The beginning part of the Sanskrit textisin praise of the main tara and corresponds to the text of143on the other hand, the mongolian text does not correspond, this is not even in praise, but is an  invitation' which isused to invite the goddesses into a offering place, and is very similar to the beginning ofamanuscript text which is in the private collections i otdos and a classical chinese textwhich is contained in the taisho-daizokyou, as Yang (2008) has already pointed out).around the icon of the 18 Tara, which is positioned next to the main tara, the Mongo-ian invitation' continues. These sentences are similar to those appearing in the ordos andclassical chinese texts1)on the other hand, the Sanskrit text is the praise of the 1s tara,which matches the icon drawn.Then, where is the Mongolian praise of the main tara? we can find it beside the 〓aTara's icon with the Sanskrit praise of her.Skt.
Mong.
namah satusaraccandrasampurnapatalanane .orasahasranikaraprahasatkiranoiivale i/aum morgimui tari bayatuiuttari ada tudyar gegeken bolycituri qamuy kusel dar-a eke-dir suvahausily-tur bi maytan morguimu iotgunnufFrom this point on, we find that each mongolian text has shifted by two icons; for ex-ample, the praise of the 3d Tara is placed beside the〓 Tara, the praise of the4 tara isbeside the h Tara, and so on. for the sake of brevity, i will omit the details for each iconon the western wall and will instead provide some examples from the eastern wall. on this
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesOn the praise of the21 taras in the arjiai cave temple (n. yamaguchi)(1wall, most of the sanskrit texts have been lost, but the tibetan and mongolian texts are stillavailable. here, again, the mongolian texts show similar discrepancy. for example,Tib.
Mong.
phyag 'tshal dkon mchog gsum mtshon phyagmorgumu tarad kemeged bad kemekui-betrgya'i sor mos thugs khar [kar」 rnam parcinatus-un iasal-i masi-da ebdegcibrgvan ma/
cinatus-un onisutu kirduin-i masi-da daruyci]na lus phyogs kyi 'khor lo mrgyan ['khorbarayun quriyan jegun jigsen kol-iyer darujuos brgyan] pa'i rang gi 'od kyitshogs mnamssitamal yal kurulgekuli masida badarapci-taikhrug ma9
unlike the Mongolian texts, the sanskrit and Tibetan texts all correspond to each other,as in the example that follows,Skt.
namas turapadaghatahu  karakarabiite /phyag tshal tu re [tu re'i]/habs ni brtabs pasmerumandarakailasabhuvanatrayacutini 7hum girnam pa'j sa bon nyid ma/ti rab mandara [ mandara ] dang 'bigs byed〓
Tib.
jig tten gsum rnams g-yo banyidma7This discrepancy between the mongolian text and the icons and other texts is entirely dueto it beginning with the "invitation'. following this review of the mongolian texts, it isclear that the text on the walls corresponds closely to that of 1431but not that of the kan-jur.
Conclusion
acomparison between the different texts andicons pertaining to the21taras has beeimade. This comparison has revealed some discrepancies regarding the Mongolian text onthe walls, which leaves us with some questions that remain to be answered. in addition.presenting the transcriptions ofthe full texts with the icons is a task for the future.aa final remark, the description of the mongolian text on the wall is more similar tothat of1431than to that of the kanjur which was printed in the ch'ing(清)era. The sec-ond line of the 7 praise is perhaps the best example of this among the examples of textspresented in this paper. in addition, the original of1431was made in the yuan era. Thesefacts indicate that the textin the cave could be based on the text which had been availableduring the period from the yuan to the ming eras.
The  uapanese sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieS)〓n the praise of the21taras in the ariai cave temple (n. YaMagucHI)(figure 2)
(Figure 3)
1)for further information on the arjai cave temple, see haiyin Yang, historichropologicl studies on the ariai caues, ordos, mongolia, Fukyo-sya,2008. This work refers to the cavetemple's construction, historical legends, the excavated mongolian texts among other aspects.as for the unearthed tibetan texts, see naomi sato, 〓preliminaty Report on the investigation ofthe unearthed tibetan documnents from the ariai grotto', journal of indicn d buddhist stud-ies1)(2007),pp.4-452.2)Yang (208),pp.4.3)The arjai cave temple has66caves, and the icons and the praises ofthe taras are on the wallsof cave no.32in sumetu arjai. see Yang (2008),p.21.4)as widely known, tara is a goddess/a female buddha who is very popular in tibetan anMongolian buddhism. the worship of her seems to date from about the oth century in india,where she was regarded as the consort of avalokitesvara. She has several forms. of which〓thewhite tara' and "the green tara' are well known. The21taras have evolved from the greenTara. See l.A. waddel. The indian buddhist cult of avalokita and his consott tara The sav-iouress' illustrated from remains in magadha", j2(1894),pp.51-89.5)This work was made in the age of the sth emperor of the ming dynasty, xuan-zong(宣宗).The original seems to have been made in the yuan(元)era. see h. karmay. earyo-tibetomar, warminster,1975,p, Yang (2008)p.87 f. Yang (2008) has already shown the com-parison of the text on the wall with the text of1431,as well as with the ordos manuscript textwhich is mentioned belowiFootnote10.6)jaiu fegis nogcigsen eke d- eke-yi. ineker tupuu burqad ber maytam nomlaysan. (sesLokesh chandra (ed.), mongolic kaniur (vol.5),new delhi,1973,Folio no.114-17.)7)before presenting this paper, i briefly reported on the Sanskrit and tibetan texts of the cave atthe international conference oariai grotto which was heldin september2008.(nariko yama-guchi, 〓aReport on the Manuscripts and the writings on the wall paintings of the ajai grotto",collectionofpapers, inner mongolia academy of social Sciences, arjai grotto academy irotog banner, 208,pp.4465.)8)due to partial peeling, not all of the icons and texts can be seen. in regard to the texts, almost
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieson the praise ofthe21 taras in the ariai cave temple (N. yaMaguchi)(15half have been lost. on the earstemn wall all the sanskrit text has peeled off except for the 17thsand the tibetan texts and Mongllian texts are also barely available. on the westemn wall, almostall the Tibetan texts have been lost except the 4th's, although the sanskrit and Mongolian texare still available. The mongolian texts are in good comparatively condition, although the 4th'sand17th's have been lost.9)the transcriptions of the text are from131,but the shaded parts are the words not presentin1431,which actually exist on the walls. The mongolian transcriptions ate basically taken fromYang (28).concerning the use of brackets:[]…in the mongolian text, this indicates the the description in the textof the mongolian kan-jur, which i have newly added here in this paper, while in the tibetan text, this indicates thewords found in the text which is contained in the tibetan bk'a'gyur (bcl 's  sgrolma layang dg par'dsp'i samgs rgys bstodpa gsungs pa.[p77]).(… indicates mote suitable spellings10)The ordos text begins as follows; om budalan-u erkim manglai-yin orun-a nopuyan dam-urusig-ece qubilan abida-bar terigiin-ben cimegsen/ yurbancay-un burqad nar-un oli dhar-a eke-nugid selte itedgunor more details, see haiying yang ed), mcnuscripts foprivote col-lections iorchss, mongolia (1), koln, 2, pp.117-126,as well as haiying yang, historical-anthropologicol studiesoongolicamnscripis, discovered fom the arjai cave, ordos,inner mongolia, grant-in-aid for scientific research (c(2),jSPs(005) p.117and Yang(2008),p.97)
The corresponding part of the classical chinese text sheng iucfomu ershiyizhong lizoniing(聖救度佛母二十一種禮讃經[T11)is as follows;波答拉勝境緑色答麻字生三世佛業母頂嚴無量光祈並眷属臨.1)the ordos text is; tngri ba asuris-un titim-yi qoyar kol-ben lingqub-a-dur bikilgen/qamuyele ugeyigun-i deyilugci getulgegci eke-duir bi morgumnu//The classical chinese text is;諸天非天頂髻嚴恭敬跪捧兩足蓮度諸窮苦中之母致禮救度佛母前.
(key words) inner mongolia, arjai cave temple / grotto,21 taras, polyglot text(Part-time lecturer, osaka university)
