The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies)journalofindticn d buddhist studies vol.58,no.3. march20The image of apsaras Urvasi in the Epic mahobhoratISHiHARaMisato1.The curse story of apsaras urvasiin the mahubhorataNowadays we usually use the critical edition of poona (c.ed.) to study the maha-bharata (mbh). however, the story about urvasi and arjuna (the u-asoryis omittetfrom the text of c.ed. The story can be summmarized as follows.The apsaras urvasi seduced arjuna who came to indra's heaven, but he strictly refused her seduc-tion because she was his remote ancestress. Then she got furious and cursed him to 〓be a eunucldancer'. after the god indra knew that incident, he promised ariuna that he would become a maragain after he spent one year as a eunuch dancerThe main background that the uastory was omitted fro c. ed. is Sukthankar's revi-sion who is an editor of the 3ra book of the mbh (aranyakaparvan). he considered the u-story as 〓a late addition" from the following reasons. First, he points out that kasmiri ver-sioon which c.ed. based lacks the u-astory and the highly erotic description of urvasiis incompatible with the epic setting.〓' second, he also indicates that the u-astory plays arole as an underplot of following book (virataparvan) in which arjuna disguises himself as afemale dancer and secretly stays at a palace one year, but yirotaparvan is generally consid-ered as a late addition, so the uastory is regarded as mnuch later addition to mbh. howev-er, although the u-astory is an underplot ofit, there is no clear reference to urvasT's cursein virataparvan.4 moreover bhoratamaniari of ksemendra lacks the whole u-astory.)Sukthankar omitted the ua stoty on the above grounds. the purpose of this paper isto give further consideration to the formation of the ustory and illuminate the immage ofUrvasi in it.The first reference to urvasi dates back the veda period. urvasi is the only apsaras
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist StudiesThe image of apsaras urvasi in the epic mahabharata (m. ishiharA)mentioned individually in the vedas.9) it is expected that the dialogue of pururavas andurvasi'irgved.9were created on the basis of the myth on the romance of the humanking pururavas and apsaras urvasi. The motif of their romance has been handed downfrom generation to generationin various forms.Then not only some parts of the verse and but also an element of agini-manthana, a rit-ual of the churning of the fire, were taken in satapatha brahmana in later poriod." mostof pururavas-urvasi stories iuranas are regarded as having originated in the story in-tapatha brahmana. however, ojihara supposes that only murana and padmpurona completely lost its mythical element originated from veda period exceptionally andinstead, the theme of "the curse of the saint' occupies an important position. i additionto this, kalidasa transformed the original story into a new stoty with a happy ending in hiswork, vikramorvasiyam.Moreover handique discusses the whole previous studies about apsaras.9) he studiesthe origin of apsaras, as well as many stories about apsarases in various works, and thenow of the development of pururavas and urvasi story, and the relatiot of apsaras andDevadasi.
3.The references about apsaras urvasiin the mbhThere are just a few places which refer to urvasi i.ed. the name urvasi is mainlfound in the lists of apsarases. though the whole story of famous pururavas and urvast'sromance is not foundinc.ed., the story is briefly suggested in a part of king Yayati's gene-alogy, c.ed.1,70.21-22.c.ed., Yayati is positioned as one of the ancestors of kuru race.and urvasi and pururavas are also ancestors of ariuna under this genealogy. These facts donot contradict the u-Astoty.However the u-astory is not suggested in the summary lists of 10oparvan and 18par-van of the Mbh, which are includedin c.ed.1.2(paravasamgrahaparvan). Except for these,there are some places where pururavas and urvasi are mentioned as a simile (c.ed.1.40105.115.14) and urvasi is suggested as a mother of rsyasringa inrsyasringa story (c.ed.3.110.4).Thatis to say, urvasi rarely appear the suface of Mbh story as a leading role withclear character. as far as this respect is concerned, the u-a story can be regarded as havinghigh originality.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies)the image of apsaras urvasi in the epic mahabhorata (M. IshihaRa)1.The variety of forms of apsaras storiesbesides urvasi, there are many stories in which apsarases appear. however, they aregeterally the development foims from several stereotyped motifs. Their stories can beclassified as the following three patterns.〓
a. The Romance of pururavas and urvasi.b. aman accidentally catches sight of apsaras, and then, desires her and eiaculates. because of it,theit child is botn.c, apsaras is sent to a man by God (mainly indra) to obstruct his penancea. started with rgveda and was adopted in a large number of classic literature with thestory in satapatha brahmana as their bases, and furthermore, kalidasa composed v-kramorvsoyam on the basis of these literatures at a later time. in addition, many second-ary compositions about this romance were written in a number of puranas.11concerningB., many similar works were composed in the epic or purana periods.1c. is also fre-uuently seen in the same periods.13in this case, apsarases sometimes fail to obstruct th)enance by ascetics and, on the contrary, apsararses are cursed by the ascetics.14)5.The originality of the uastoryHowever, the u-Astory is quite different from these apsaras stories mentioned above.There are two large differences. first. Urvasi aggressively seduced ariuna on her own will.second, urvasi angrily cursed ariuna because he refused her seduction. The fact that ap-sarases are prostitutes in heaven with extraordinary beauty have not changed since ancienttimes, but the motif that apsaras voluntarily seduces men without the order ofthe gods, asseen in the u-story, is vety exceptional case. moreover, urvasi cursed ariuna to be a eu-nuch dancer in the u-astory. The motif that ascetics angrily curse apsarases is often foundin many works, but the motif that〓 apsarases curse men' is so rare case.oly brahmavaivart purana has a story similar to this rare motif.1 The story is asfollows: apsaras Rambha loved the ascetic devala and aggressively seduced him. howev-er, she was stubbornly refused by him, and then, she angrily cursed him to deform hisbodv. as a result, the eight parts of his body werc bent. so devala was called astavakra.) brahmg-vaivart purana is said to be one of the latest puranas. and, because these motifs aresimilar to each other, it seems reasonable to conclude that the tine composed the ustory
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesThe image ofapsatas urvasi in the epic mchabharata (m. ishihara)is much nearer to the purana period than the epic period because of theif similarity. othese grounds, I have come to the conclusion that the image of apsaras urvasi in the u-astory is not traditional but quite new one6.Conclusion
My argument so far is only support the reason that Sukthankar excluded the ua storyfrom c.ed. however, it provides the two new perspectives on the study of the image of ur-vasi. First, i pointed out that the image of urvasi in the story is quite different fronrthe inages of apsarases in any other works and has uniqueness. Second, it is possible tosay that this image is created i comparatively later times.lastly, it is especially worth mentioning that in the u-stoty ariuna said to urvasithat you are my ancestress, in other words, almost equivalent to my mother' when he re-fused her temptation. In brief, ariuna had already been regarded as the descendant of puru-ravas tacitly by the time the u-astory was composed. although the term〓kaurava" is usedalmost equivalent to 〓 paurava' in c.ed., it is likely that Paurava race that derived fromPururavas was never the same as kaurava race long before mbh was arranged in the pres-ent form. for example, the king paurava appears as an opponent of the five pandava princ-es including arjuna.1nd the five pandava princes are usually called kuru, kaurava, andBharata, but they are rarely called paurava. That is to say, it is supposed that somebodywho intended to raise the status of the genealogy of pandava princes positioned the famousking pururavas as their ancestor and made up the false connection between 'paurava ancKaurava .
For the reasons mentioned above, it can be concluded that the u-astory is a quite nevinsertion, which was added after the mbh was almost arrangedin the present form.Notes:
1)see the hahabharatam with the bharota bhawadleepa commentaryy ofnilkantha, vol.2, newdelhi,1979.3.45-46,c.ed. appendixino.62)see mbh, the aranyakaparuan, poona,194ed.) introduction, p.xix. however this epi-sode exists these manuscripts; k2,b, dc, dn, d1-6,k4,d2,3, S without kasmin version.3)ibid., pp.xik-xx.4)lbid., p.xx.5)ibid., p.xxi.5)see keith, the Religionad philosophy ofthe edd ad cpanishacks, harvard oriental series
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiesvol.31,cambridge,1925,p.182.〓)
7)see oldenberg, akhyana-hymnenimrgveda, zd xxix,1885,p.75-76.8)see ojihara, koujo hulavika to agnimitra ou,2002, pp.227-228.9)handique, apsarases ninicn literature amd the legendofurvasi ad puriiravas. new delhi2001.
10)see e.g., c.ed.1.67,1.11.,2.1011,42,13.20.19,13.151.1011)see vis puronaiv.6.19ff.; matsypurana 115-20, kathasaritsagara xvii.4 and so on12)see, e.g., urvvibhandakayasriga (c.ed. 3.110.11-18),Ghrtacibharadvaia=drona (ced.1.120.3-5,153.1-5),Ghrtacivyasasuka (C.ed.12.311) and so on.13)see, e.g., indrajanapaiaradvata gautamapa, krpi ced.112-13),indraMenakavisvamitra - sakuntala (c.ed.120-66.9, ramayana3-64) and so on.14)see, e.g., Indra-ramhavisvamitra [rambha was cursed to be a stone for ten thousanyears.]ramayana 14.11-12),indra, naraavpuurvasas [vapu was cursed to be abird for sixteen years.] (arkandevura1.27-64).15)see srikrsna janma khanda.30. cf. kathasaritsagara, kathamukha-lambaka.1.32-34.16)see rocher, l., ahistory' of indicliterature, vol.2, Fasc.3,p.163. The oldest version ofbrahmavaivartpuruna is said to belong to  century, and arranged in the present form be-[ween and1 century.17)see, e.g., c.ed.2.2,6.57.20,7.171.64.andso on.(Key words) 〓ahabhorata, purana, urvasi, arjuna, apsaras(Graduate student, The university of tokyo)財団法人仏教伝道協会英訳大蔵経翻訳叢書SHboGNTRUDRM-YTRaSURYvOLUME4
(正法眼藏第四巻)
Translatedby Gudo nishijima & chodo coss(Reprint of the book published by windbell publications in199.B5変形判定価6,825円(税込)
