The  uapanese sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSPrainakaragupta on inference: how doesInference work without External Realities ?KobayaSHihisayasu0. IntroductionBuddhist idealists (vijnanavadins) hold the theory that there does not exist an external object independently of the mind and assume that there is only a continuum of cognitions(vinancsantana).within the framework of this theory, how do they account for inference(anumana)? prajnakaragupta exhaustively discusses this question in his pvaov392-396. he argues that inference can be established without assuming the existence of theexternal world and, from the point of view of what is really an object to be obtainedthrough a cognition(praptivisaya), that, even for Sautrantikas, what is to be obtainedthrough inference must be an appearance (pratibhasa) in the mind. in this paper, by exam-ining the argunents brought forward by prajnakaragupta, i shall show how he establishesinference within the framework of the vijnanavada theory.1.Inference of fire firom smoke1.1.vi35dharmakirti explains how the inference of fire from smoke can be es-tablished from the idealistic standpoint.pviii35 tatropi dhumubhasa dih prabodhapatuvosangamayed agninirbhosam dhiyam eva na pavakam"Even in that case [ie., on the assumption that there does not exist an extetnal object independent-ly of the mind], a cognition in which smoke appears makes know only a cognition in which firappears and whose latent impression is aptto being awakened, and not fire."prajnakaragupta comments as follows:〓v1,12-13dhimabhosa hi buddthir agmivdsanapratibaddha, tatah vasananumiyate. s cg(ca m, om.cva) vasana prabodhabhimukhatvad agnipratibhasam janayatiti povaka-prati-bhasapraptya pramanam.1
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies"indeed. the cognition in which smoke appears is necessarily connected with the latent impressionof fire: the latent impression [of fire] is inferred from that [cognition]. ad the latent impression[of fire] produces the appearance of fire since it is about to be awakened. therefore, [the inferenceof the appearance of fire from the appearance of smoke] is a valid means of cognition pramana)because one can obtain the appearance of fire [through this inference].2let us suppose that three different cognitions arise in a seqquence.cognition1
cognition (Fire.Impressionof smoke3Impression of fire1impression of Fire2impression of fire3Note that each cognition has the latent impressions of smoke and fire. now cognition(Smoke) is necessarily connected with impression of Fire 1, on the basis of this connection,one can infer impression of Fire l from cognition(Smoke); this impression of Fire 1brings about cognition3 (Fire) through impression of Fire 2, which amounts to saying thatcognition3 (Fire) is infeired from cognitionSmoke).It is important to note in this connection that prajnakaragupta holds that, within theframework of the viinancvada theory, the inference of fire from smoke must be explainedon the assumption that there holds the following causal relation between cognition andim-pression.2)
cognition1
cognitio(smoke,〓cognition (Fire )cognition(Fire)Impression of smokeImpression of smoke 〓[mpression of smokesmpression of smoke3mpression of Firesof cognition(Smoke), impression of smoke l and impression of Fire l serve respec-tively as a primary cause (upadana-karana) and as a cooperative condition sahakurikurana).of cogntion (Fire), impression of Fire 2and impression of Smoke 2serve respectivelyas a primary cause and as a cooperative condition. cognition(smoke) serves as themwakening factor (prabodhaka) of impression of Fire 2 which is the primary cause of cog-nition3(fire). Thus, saying that the inference of fite fron smoke takes place anounts tosaying that cognition3 (Fire) arises from impression of Fire 2 which is awakened by co-nition2(smoke). when prainakaragupta says that there is a necessary connection (prati-bandha) between cognition(Smoke) and impression of Fire l. he implies that impressionof Fire l produces cognition(Smoke) indirectly, as a cooperative condition.
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies〓va5,3-34:t (t pva, des t, om. tata m) ekasamagryadhinatvod gamyagamakabhavahpavakatatkaryadhumayor iti sakulamakalam, om. scklma,t) samaniasam."Therefore, [in the vijnanavadins' view also, ] the indicator-indicated relation (gamyagamaka-bhava) between fire and smoke which results from the [fire] is established on the basis of their de-pendence on one and the same set of causes (ekasamagryadhinatva) and hence everything can beeasonably established [without accepting the existence of an external obiect].),1.2.itis also important to note that prajnakaragupta introduces the concept of ekasamagryadhinatua 〓being dependent upon one and the same set of causes' into his explanationof the occurrence of the inference.The use of the term ekasamagryddhnatva reminds us of dharmakirti's analysis of the in-ference of the color (rupa) ofa citron from its taste (rasa).4)according to dharmakirti, theoperating process of the inference can be shown as followsThe inference dharmakirti considers is precisely the inference of color 2 from taste 2. ofTaste 2, taste 1 and color l serve respectively as a primary cause and as a cooperativecondition; of color 2, color l and taste l serve respectively as a primary cause and as acooperative condition. this implies that color l is surely to produce color 2when taste 1produces taste 2,on the basis of which it is proper to say that as Taste l is inferred fromTaste 2,so color 2is inferred from taste 2.Thus it has been shown that the inference of color from taste and that of fire fromsmoke have the same structure such that the effect which the cooperative condition to produce what serves as a logical reaso (hetu), as a primary cause, brings about is inferred.lt is to be noted, however, that those two types of inference differ in that what is co-nized through the former is refeired to the present, while, according to prainakaragupta,what is cognized through the latter is referred to the future. dharmakirti explicitly stateshat color 3 cannot be inferred from taste 2,while prajnakaragupta argues that cognition3(Fire) is inferred from cogniton(Smoke).2.whatis to be inferred?prajnakaragupta goes on to discuss inference from the point of view of what is really ai
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudies〓
obiect to be obtained through inference. The point made by him is that, even for sautranti-kas who accept the existence of the extemnal world, what is said to be an object of inferencemust be precisely what appears in an inferential cognition and not a corresponding externalobject.
To begin with, prainakaragupta tries to establish that what is inferred is a thing whichwill exist in the future. it is importantto note the following statement:Pv32-33paramarthatah sakalam svarupavisayam eva, vyavaharato 'rthavisayata. sbhavyarthah praptivisaya ititasyaivorthakriyakaritvad arthatvam."on the ultimate level (paramarihatah), any [cognition] has for its object its own self alone. onthe conventional level vyapaharofuh), [a cognition is saidto] have for its object an [external]thing. and the [external thing]」 is a thing yet to occur (bhovyartha) and an obiect of obtainment;therefore, only such a thing is a useful thing (artha) because it serves to fulfill apractical purpose(arthakriyokarin)."〓
For instance, fire is regarded as useful only when it serves the purposes of removing cold,cooking food, and so forth. The fire being inferred, which is presently existent, is not theobiect to be obtained through a activity toward it. a future fire is to be obtained. For firecannot serve practical purposes until it is obtained. according to prainakaragupta, if theobtainment ofan object which serves practical purposes is taken into consideration, what istreated as an obiect ofa cognition must be the one which will existin the future and not theone which exists at the time when the cognition is taking place.according to prainakaragupta, however, from the point of view of what is really anobject to be obtained, what is inferred is not a future extemnal fire but the future appearancsof fre.
pv,17-19apica buhye 'py arthe nagnir anumyate, apitu bhaui pratibhosa eva. tadarthitaide dondu gmyer b'i phyir t, tadarthatvat m, tadirthatvot pva) praninam. na hy apratibhasa-nanendgnina kasyacit prayojanam. pratibhosarthitoycm-arthitoyom m, donu gmyer bt, -anvi-toypva)ca bhoni pratibhuso bhaaty anumiyamanah. kiagmyanumanena."in addition, even if there exists an external thing, what is inferred is not an [external] fire but thsfuture appearance [of fire in a cognition」 because people seek it. For there is no use [in seeking.he fire which never appears [incognition]. and, since [people] seek the appearance [of fire],what is inferred must be the future appearance [of fire]. what is the use of infenring the fire  whichexists externally]?clearly prajnakaragupta puts here his view that what never appears inacognition is practi-cally what is inexistent. needless to say, this view can be traced back to dharmakirti who
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiessays in his pvinii(59,2-3)"to be existent is to be cognized" upalambhah satta).)ac-cording to prajnakaragupta, what is an object of inference is the appearance of an obiectina cognition, this appearance is said to be referred to the future in relation to the time whenthe object exists externally.3.Three kinds of activitieswe have seen that, according to prajnakaragupta, what is considered to be an obiect ofinference is of three kinds: an object which exists at the time when inference is takingplace, an object which is to be obtained and which is said to exist in the future, an obiect aswhat appears in an inferential cognition. The same can be said of perception.〓v,2tripidiho vyavahoro 'yapyuppannadibhedatuhtadcsrayena sakalam idam yuktamm eveksyate (nyid t, ive-pva,m)7〓vyuipannanam vyavaharo vartamanarthavisaypratyaksam. vyutpannanam bhavipisayam.atipyyutpannancmpratibhasamnatravisayam edethis activity is of three kinds according as [one who performs the activity] is divided [into threeypes]: the unthoughtful nyyuppanna), [the thoughtful (vyupamna), and the extremely thought-(ul (atipympanna)]. It is seen that if such [n activity] is resorted to, all this is perfectly reasonable.
The activity of perceiving [ which occurs] with reference to an object that exists in the present is aractivity [carried out] by the unthoughtful; [the activity of perceiving which occurs] with referenceto a object yet to take place is [ activity carried out] by the thoughtful, [the activity of perceivingwhich occurs」 with reference only to a mere appearance [ cognition] is [an activity cairiedout] by the extremely thoughtful."according to prajnakaragupta, thus, a cognitive activity vyavahara), inferential or percep-tual, is of three kinds: the first is carried out by the unthoughtful with respect to an obiectthat is said to exist in the present in relation to the tirme a cognitive activity is taking place;the second by the thoughtful with respect to an object yet to occur, the third by the ex-tremely thoughtful with respect to a mere appearance in acognition.〓
4.conclusion
we have seen that prajnakaragupta makes the following points regarding inference. (1)The inference of fire from smoke can be explained on the basis of the causal relation be-tween a cognition and a latent impression vasana).(2)The inference of fire from smokehas the same structure as that of color froin taste. both types of inference can be explained
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesby introducing the concept of 'being dependent on one and the same set of causes' (ekasa-magryradhinatua).(3)in the final analysis, an object of a cognition, inferential or perceptu-al, should be an appearance of an objectin acoginition.prajnakaragupta advances the theory of "mere appearance" (pratibhasamatra), whichclaims that from the point of view of the ultimate truth, a cognition is complete in itself, sothat it is utterly impossible that a cognition is related to another. according to him, thistheory goes even within the framework of the sautrantika school. For, according to thetheory, what is real and hence is to be obtainedis simply what appears ina cognition.*i wish to express my gratitude to professor brendan S. gillon of mcgill university who kindlyhelped me immprove my englishnotes: 16,p69b3-4).2)see pv13-33,kobayashi2001203.3)In this respect, manorathanandin also takes the same view. See pvv237,11-12.4)secpvSV7,14-8,4,hayes & gillon1912-13,6.5)see pvSv8,5-11,hayes & gillon7)j(d181;07b5)ad p.28-2999113.6)see pv12,25-26.7)j(d181;07b5)ad p,8-29'tgs pa maip ni dpyadp dmnpa steabbreviations: kobayashirainakaragupta's Theoty of wcsana," jibS5-1:2-04Japanese). hayes & gillon1troductionto dharmakirti's Theory of inference as Presentedivsv1-10," p191-73ramanavarttikalamkaratika (jayanta)4222,5720.M=Manuscript b of pva: S. watanabe, ed. patna-narita,1998.pramanavarttikalamkara: r.Sankrtyayana, ed. patna,1953.pviramanaviniscaya: e. Steinkeller, ed. beiling-vienna,2007.pvramanavarttikavrtti: r. sankrtyayana, ed. patna,193-40.vVramana-varttika-svavrtti: r. gnoli, ed. rome,1960manavarttikatika (Ravigupta)25,5722betan translation ofpv221.5719.(This research was supported in part by a grant-in-aid for jSPs fellows.)(key words)prajnakaragupta, idealism, anumana, bhavin(jSPSresearch fellow.ph.d.)
