The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesacomparative study of characteristics of the perception Theoriesin the yuktidipika and the yogasuitrabhasyaKondohayato
Introduction in the samkhyakarika (SK) of isvarakrsna.cE),perception is de-fined as "the determination with reference to each [sense faculty's] respective obiects〓ab7: pratiyisayadhyavsayo dirstam), and SK23a attributes the function of 〓determination" tothe intellect (buddhi). From these, it follows that the act of perception is performed by theintellect according to SK. on the other hand, an ancient teacher varsaganva, the predeces-sor of isvarakrsna, defined perception as  the functioning of the auditory and other sensefaculties' (srotradivrtti), and vindhyavasin, a disciple of varsaganya, qualifled that func-tioning by the adjective "avikalpika' (srotradivrttir avikalpika), thus applying the notion ofbeing free from conceptual construction to his teacher's definition of perception. Motegi[1984]has shown some doctrinal cotrespondence of the yuktidipiku .80-720,yd),by far the most informative commentary on SK, to varsaganya and vindhyavasin. however,the perception theory of yd has not been fully revealed. in this paper, i would like to sheda new light on the development of Samkhya's perception theoty by showing the strikingsimilarities that Yd shares with the yogasutrabhasYSBh) of vyasa(c. cE?)withregard to the function ofthe sense faculties and related issues.1.distinction between pramuna andpramana-phalaBefore investigating the perception theory, we will examine how yd distinguishes be-ween the instrument of cognition (pramana) and the result of cognition pramana- )phala)in the commentary on SK5ab" where perception is defined thus:A result [of cognition] is distinct [from an instrument of cognition], because it has a differ-ent substratum. an instrument of cognition is based on the intellect and is called as the determina-tion. aresult of cognition is based on the spirit and is characterized by benefit (anugraha). it isnot possible for the two, which have different substrata, to be the same. (ydad Sk5aIn this passage, yd asserts that the crux of the distinction between pramana and pra-mana-phala is that the former is based on the intellect, whereas the latter is based on the
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesacomparative study of characteristics ofthe perception Theories inthe yuktidipika and the yogusutrabhasya , kondo)(1〓Spirit (purusa). Thus, yd explains the difference between the two by virtue of the categori-cal difference of their substrata (adhikarana),namely, the intellect and the spirit.Asimilar view is expressedin YSbho YS1.7 that enummerates three sorts of valid cog-nition (pramana), the first ofwhich is perception:The mind's function produced by virtue of the mind being colouredffected, uparaga) by ex-temnal things through the channel of sense faculties, . is a [valid] cognition [named] petception.aresult [ofthe perception] is an indistinct realization of the mind's function, which belongs to thespirit. (ysbh ad Ys1.73))since the pramana is listed as one of the five sorts of the mind's function in YS1.6, itis evident that the idea of perception as a function of the mind (citavrti ) was already acceptedin Ys1.7, but we do not find any reference to the pramana-phalainYS. the abovepassage of ySbh, on the other hand, refers to the spirit's realization of the mind's percep-tual function (pauruseycs cittavrtibodhah), identifying it as a result of perceptive cognition.It is noteworthy in this connection that the concept of the mind (cita) in the Yoga systemcoiresponds to the samkhya's three internal organs ( the intellect, the ego-consciousness and themanas ). Thus, yd and YSbh give nearly the same explanation of the distinction betweerpramana and pramana-phl4, with only a slight difference in that Yd relates the prama-na to the intellect, whereas ysbh connects it to the citta that comprises the intellect.2.conceptual and terminological affinity in the explanation of the Perceptive Process〓functions of the Sense faculties and the intellectin yfirst, we will examine aportion of yd ad SK28ab, where we find an interesting description of the functions ofsense faculties in the perceptive process that gives rise to the determinate cognition.by the grasping [of objects ] is meant the function of sense faculties, which consists in theiiissuming the form of the [object] tadrupyapati) by virtue of a contact with an object. like-wise, the "notion' is a determinate cognition.., derived from imitating (amukura) the function ofaense faculty [which has assumed the form of] the object. furthermore, when a contact with ob.jects ceases, the auditory sense faculty and the like cease to have the function of assuming the formf the object,. ydad Sk2ab5))according to this passage, sense faculties have the function of 'assuming the form ofm object' tadrupyapatti). The same function is referred to in a slightly different way, spe-ifically as "the function that consists in transformation into the form of an obiect" (visaya-earaparinamatmika vrttin) in another passage of yd). we find an additional expression fothe same function, "the function ofa sense faculty, which has received an obiect" (upattavi-
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies)acmparative study of characteristics ofthe perception Theories in the yuktidipiku andthe yogasutrabhasya . kcndo)ayendriyavrti) in some passages of y. it is also important, however, to note that thosepassages refer to the operation of the intellect or the internal otgans in the form of a per-ceptive determination that follows the same function ofa sense faculty.To sum up, the cognitive process that results in a perceptive determination consists oftwo steps according to yd.First, a sense faculty graspsan obiect; that is, it comes into thestate of assuming the form of the object, or it transforms into the form of the object. Sec-ond. the intellect 〓imitates" anukara) the function ofthe sense faculty that has received theobject, also coming into the state of assuming the form of the object. This view cannot befoundin other commentaries on SK, and therefore is an interpretation peculiar to yd2.2functions of the sense faculties and the mind inYShYSbh does not clearly ex.plain the function of a sense faculty with regard to perception, but we may get some ideafrom the above-mentioned sentences in YSbhad YS1.7.namely, a sense faculty is regard-edas a channel' (pranalika) that connects the mind with an exteinal object, bringing it intcthe state of being coloured' by the obiect. onthe other hand, better explanation is given ifYSbh ad Ys1.4concerning an aspect of the mind upon grasping an object:Just as a crystal is coloured by various colours of cushions [on which it lies] in accordance witthe difference between the cushions and manifests itself in various formslours) of the cush-ions, so the mind is colouredffected, uparakta) by a supporting foundation (lambana) as anobiect to be grasped, has come into the state (samapanna ) of the object to be grasped, and mani-fests itself in the form of the obiect to be grasped. .. it should be understood that the same is thecase with a grasping [organ](grahana), ie. a sense faculty. when [the mind] is coloured by thejupporting foundation such as a grasping [organ], and has come into the state of the grasping [or-〓an], itmanifests itself in the form of the grasping [organ].(YSBh ad ys1418additicnally, the mind and objects are compared to a piece of iron and a magnet re-spectively in YSbh ad YS4.7. Just like a magnet attracting an iron item nearby, objectsthat achieve a relationship with the mind, influence ( "colour', uparanjayanti ) it9).Taking these accounts into consideration, the view of YSbhon perception can be sum-marized as follows: The mind is affected by an external object through the media of sensefaculties and assumes the same form as the object. accordingly, ySbh has a remarkableconceptual and terminological affinity with ydin describing the dependence of the mindupon grasped objects through a sense faculty in the process of perception. with regard tothe operation ofa sense faculty, on the other hand, Ysbh, unlike yd, does not affirmposi-tively that a sense faculty assumes or transforms itself into the form ofan object. it is still
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesacomparative studyofcharacteristics ofthe perception theories inthe yuktidipika andthe yogasatrabhasya (H.kondo)(21open to question whether this idea is implied by the expression 'through the channel of asense faculty',or yd developed the concept later.conclusion we have seen a striking similarity between yd and ySbhin some aspects oftheir explanations of the perceptive process. it may not be certain whether YSbh shares theview with yd that a sense faculty will transform itself into the appearance of grasped ob-jects, but they substantially agree that the substratum of perception, be it the intellect or themind, assumes the form of objects. probably, we should also considerin this context a con-ceptual or terminological close correspondence between the two texts with regard to thedistinction between pramana and pramana-phala.To elaborate, yd seemns to emphasize on the function of a sense faculty in explainingthe perceptive process. although it remains to be resolved whether yd accepts the opera-tion of a sense faculty as the first stage of perception, at Motegi [14's suggestion, wemay observe that ydis more inclined to the older theoty of varsaganya ad vindhyavasin.Finally, special attention should be paid in this connection to the doctrinal agreement be-tween vindhyavasin and YSbh brought to light by chakravarti [1951:p.14]and frau-wallner [1958:p.11, fn.31]. consequently, the present study suggests the possibility ofaline of development in at least some aspects of perception theory, from vindhyavasinthrough ySbh.to yd.Notes
1)in this paper, we provisionally follow the statements ofy [introduction, pp.xxv-xxviii]; fur-her, the boldface quotations fromyare vartrikas.2)ydad Sk5ab' [pp.77,20-7,2]phalasyarthantarabhovah adhikaranabhedat/ buddhyasrayam hi pramanam adhyavasayakhyampurusasraycmphalam anugrahalaksanam/ n bhinnadhikaranayor ekatvam arhati bhavitumf.3)ysbh ad ys1.7 [p.11,1-3]indriyapranalikaya cittasya bahyavastiparagat. vrttih prg-pyaksmpramanam/ phalam aisish pauruseyas cittavrttibodhah/.4)moreover, weshould also pay attention to another passage of Ydad SK5ab' [p.77,8-9]that includes the state-ment, "a benefit to the capability of sentience (cetaosakti)by this [instrument of cognition] is aresult [ofthe cognition]'([etat pramancm nenays cetanasakter anugrahas tat phalam)). theterm 〓capability of sentience' frequently used inydmay be considered to refer to the spirit itselfinevery passage. the examples of cetancsakti i yd are as follows: introduction [.,15-16], adSKlab [p.11,-6],ad Sk2d [p.0,1-2],ad Sk p.1-4],ad Sk20 [pp.180,33-182,2],adSK36[p.223,2], ad Sk37cd [p.224,-3]. additionally, the examples of 〓caitamyasakti are alsofound as follows: ad Sk19[p.176,32-34], ad SK55ab [p.258,23-26]. This expression is foundonly in the samkhyatattvakaumudi (STK) of vacaspatimisra( c.ce)(ad SK1[.68,26-27].
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesad SK5[p.8,22]),among the commentaries o SK, except for yd.on the other hand, al-though the tenm "capability of sentience" is not foundin Ys and YSbh. these two works contain theexpression citisakti" which similarly means the spirit. The examples of *citisakti iYS and YSbare as follows: ySbh a Ys1[.6,1-3],ysbha yS1[,y07,2-3,ysbhad YS407,6-7].This expression suggests that Ydhas terminology in common with Ys andYSbh.5)yd ad Sk28a [-7]visayasamparkot tadrupyopattir indriyavrttir grah-anam fatho visayendriyavritycnukcrena niscay… pratyoyah tatha visayasamparkopagame sro-tradivrttes tadrupyapagamo iti….6)cf. Yd ad SK28ab [p.203,28-30].)YdadSk5ab" [p.77,4-] isayam visayam prati vartata iti prativisaycm" km tat/ indriyam tasminy〓〓hyavasopah prativisayadhyacsaupattavisayonam indriyanum vrtbyupanipati . tddrstam pratyaksam ity arthch/d ad SK28,-27]:budchir upattavisoyendriyavyttyu-panipotct tadrupypratipcdyate/; yd ad Sk4ab" [p.70,12]fatra dstam' numa upattavisayen-criyavrttyupanpati yo'dhyavasayah; yd ad SK17p.172,3antahkaranupottavi-sayendriyavrtpyupanipatat tadrupopattav api satyam acetanatvat svaycm wpalabdhum asamartham8)YSbhad ys4.4-13]yatha sphatika uposrapabhedct tacrupoparakta upus-rayarupukarena nirbhasate, tatha grahyalambanoparaktam cittam grahyasamapannam gruhygkarena nirbhasate/.. / tathc grahanesv apindriyesu drastpyam/ grahanclambanoparaktamn grahc.l〓samnapannam grahanukorenc nirbhascte .9)Ysbh ad YS「p.193,5ayaskuntamanikalpa uisaya ayahsadharmakamn cittam abhisambandhya uparanjayanti/.Abbreviations and bibliographical ReferencesSK samkhyakorika of isvarakrsna: see yd.sTk samkhyatattvakaumudi of vacaspatimisraSK samkhyakoriko of isvarakrsna: see ydVocaispatimisrcs tattuakuumudi: ei beitrczu textkritik bei kontaminierter uberlieferung, edSrinivasa ayya srinivasan, (alt- und neu-indische studien 1),cram, de gruyter, hamburg,1967.
67.yuktidipika, the most signifcant commentary fhe samkhyakarika, criticall)ed. albrecht wezler and shuijun Motegi, vol. i, (alt- und neu-indische studien), franz steinerverlag, Stuttgart, 1998.yS yogsutra of patanjali: see ySbh.ysbh yogasutra-bhosyof vyasa: patanialayogasutrani: vcaspatimisraviracitatikasamvalitvyasabhosyasametumi,ed. ka. sa. agase, asS47,2004.chakravarti, pulinbihari[1951]origin d developmentof the samkhy ssemofthought, met-ropolitan printing and publishing house, calcutta.(〓ded.: new delhi,1975).Frauwallner, erich['die erkenntnislehre des klassischen samkhya-systems', wienerzeitschrif f die kunde sd- d o-asiens,pp.139.Motegi, Shuiun[ some problems on the knowerof samkhya(サーンキヤ学派における認識主体の問題)', journalofthe facultyofecotion Shinshu university) vol.51,pp.117-128(This article was supported by grant-in-aid for JSpS Fellows [9j3)<Key words) yukticipika, yogasutrabhdsya, samkhya, pratyaksa, varsaganya, vindhyavasiGraduate student, the university of tokyo, jspS Research fellow c)
