The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudiesconcerning Shinbutsu Shugo in medieval japaneseOnmyodo: basedohokinaidenDRAkaKISathanasios1.The aimofthis paperThe aim of this paper is to show the amalgamation patterns of Shinto and buddhism orShinbutsu Shugo(神仏習合)in medieval Japanese onmyodo(陰陽道),especially in an im-portant medieval japanese onmyodo text called hokinaiden(〓内伝).My point is thatinhokinaiden, amalgamation patterns are not limited to containing deities only from Shintoor buddhism. but also astronomical or other deities. also, i want to show that the honji sui-iaku setsu(本地垂迹説)is sometimes used irregularly, in a manner that can't be describedwith conventional buddhistic deity- Shinto deity correlation.2.The logic of the amalgamationamalgamation patterns of shinbutsu shugo in hokinaiden follow the patterns of honjiSuijaku setsu, which according to, a buddhist deity (honi ) appears as non-buddhist deity(suiiaku ). however there are cases that honii is a Shinto deity, and suiaku a buddhistic de-ity. also the amnalgamation does not include only conventional deities from buddhistic orShinto pantheon, but also other entities such as stars, which c't be defined as gods withthe conventional meaning.3.amalgamation patterns.Now, let's examine some amalgamation cases, starting with the eight princes of gozuTenno(牛頭天王王子):Taisaijin(太歳神)is Soko tenno(総光天王)and is the honii of yakushi nyorai(薬師如来).taishogun(大将軍)is mao tenno(魔王天王)andis the honiiof takeiizaiten(他化自在天).daionjin(大陰神)is Gumara tenno(倶摩羅天王)andis the honii of Shokaniizaison(聖観自在尊).saikyoiin(歳刑神)is tokudatsushin tenno(得達神天王)and is the honii of
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesconcerning Shinbutsu shugo in medieval Japanese onmyodoa. dRAkakIs)Kenrojishin(堅牢地神).saihajin(歳破神)is ryoii tenno(良侍天王)and is the honii ofKahakudaisuijin(河伯大水神).Saisatsuiin(歳殺神)is jishinso tenno(侍神相天王)and isthe honji of daiitoku(大威徳).obaniin(黄幡神)is Takushinso tenno(宅神相天王)and isthe honji of marishi Tenno(摩利支天王).byobilin(豹尾神)is jadokukeshin(蛇毒気神)and is the honii of sanbodaikoiin.(三宝大荒神)1)here we can see that the 8 princes of Gozu tenno are related to sone Teno. which arethe honji of other buddhist deities. Thus we can say that Tenno are different entities fromother buddhist deities.we have an amalgamation case where onmyodo related deities are correlated withBuddhistic deities and tenno.〓
another example is the amalgamation case that concetns the 12chinese zodiacs(十二支).The 12chinese zodiacs are onmyodo related entities that can't be identified as conventional gods, but are combined with various buddhist deities and also daisho(大将).For example:
The honii of Rat is Shaka(釈迦),itis Bikara(毘羯羅)daisho. The honii of ox is Fu-gen(普賢),it is Shotora(招杜羅)daisho. The honii of Tiger is Yakushi(薬師),it isShindara(真達羅)daisho. The honii of Rabbit is kongoshu(金剛手),it is Makora(摩虎羅)daisho. The honii of dragon is moniu(文殊),it is haira(波夷羅)daisho. the honiiof snake is jizo(地蔵),it is Indara(因達羅)daisho. The honii of horse is Sendankobutsu(梅檀香仏).it is Sanchira(珊底羅)daisho. The honii of Sheep is Marishiten(摩利支天).itis anira(安倆羅)daisho. The honii of Monkev is tokudaisei(得大勢).itis anchira(類底羅)daisho. The honii of Rooster is Muryoiubutsu(無量寿仏),it is mekira(迷企羅daisho. The honii of do is daisho Fudo myoo(大聖不動明王),it is basara(伐折羅daisho. The honiiof pig is Mirokuson(弥勒尊),itis kubira(宮昆羅)daisho.Inthe next amalgamation case the eeanventy stems(十干)are combined with bud-dhist deities and also yasha(夜叉).Thev are also combined with one of flve elements andone of five gochi nyorai(五智如来).for example:Ki no e()and ki no to(乙)are wood Gods(木神),and their each honii is Yakushi(薬師).and they are also gozanze(降三世)Yasha. also they are the spirit of daienkyochi
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesconcerning Shinbutsu Shugo in medieval japanese onmyod. drakakis)(大円鏡智)at east.(…hi no e(丙)and hi no to(丁)are fire gods(火神),atd theireach honiiis kannon(観音),and they are also gundari(軍茶利)yasha. also they are thespirit of byodoshochi(平等性智)at South.(…tsuchi noe(戊)and Tsuchi noto(己)areEarth gods(土神),and their each honii is dainichi daisho(大日大聖),and they are alsoFudo mvoo(不動明王).also they are the spinit of hokkaitaishochi(法界体性智)at middle.(…)kano e(庚)and ka no to()are metal Gods(金神),and their each honji is amida(弥陀),and they are also taiitoku(大威徳)yasha. also they are the spirit of myokanzatchi(妙観察智)at west.(…mizu no e()and mizu no to(癸)are water gods(水神),anctheir each honii is Shaka(釈迦),and they are also kongo(金剛)yasha. also they are thespirit of joshosachi(成所作智)at north.(…A slightly different amalgamation pattern is the one concerning various days frorrOnmyodo calendar cotrelated with notable events from buddhism or hinto. particularly,Sanbo kichinichi(三宝吉日)are some onmyodo days that are believed to be the days ofsome important events of buddhism, while kami kichinichi(神吉日)are days concerningShinto events. both Sanbo kichinichi4) and kami kichinichi are divided in three sets: up-per, middle and lower. for example, the upper set of Sanbokichinichi contains days like hino e tora(丙寅),which is the birthday of Sharihotsu (sariputra), mizu no e uma(壬午)which is the day when buddha estabilished gionshoia, or kano e tora(庚寅)which is theday buddha entered dandokusendandaka).while kami kichinichi deal with Shinteevents, there are some cases that are actually examples of honii suiiaku SetsurDay ki no to ushi(乙丑),is the day when hosshin dainichi(法身大日)becomes asuijaku, softens his light and appears as yudonogongen(湯殿権現)at daibonii river(大梵字川)of dewa. day tsuchi no to mi(己巳),is the day when the three daughters of Shinkoo(辰狐王)(pakini or sarasvati ) came in this land (japan) and appeared as suiiaku in threecountries. tennyo(天女)in itsukushima(厳島),Shakunyo(赤女)inchikubushima(竹生島)and kokunyo(黒女)inenoshima(江ノ島)5).other deities that are referred in kami kichinichi are izanagi and izanami appearing asKashima(鹿島)and katori(香取)daimyojin, Susanoo, amaterasu appearing both as Nai-gu(内宮)and gegu(外宮)(usually amaterasu appears only as naigi), kumano sanio gongen(熊野三所権現),empress jingu or Yamato takeru(大和武).along with deities. there
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS) concerning Shinbutsu shugo in medieval japanese onmyodo a. drakakis)are also some political figures such as Fujiwara daijodaijin(藤原太政大臣),sugawara nMichizane(菅原道真)or kamatari no daiiin(鎌足大臣).The upper set of Sanbo kichi-nichi has also a part of divination, mentioning auspicious days for various actions relatedto the above described events. For example, the day when budcha estabilished gGionshoia(mizunoe uma) is consideted auspicious day to erect temples, while the day when buddhaentered dandokusen(kanoe tora) is considered auspicious day to enter school, shave heador climb mountain.In this amalgamation case it is interesting to mention the diversity which concerns auijaku. while usually amalgamation cases of honji suijaku setsu link a buddhist deityhonji, that appears as anon buddhist deity suilaku, we have the case of amaterasu appear-ing as naigu and gegu, which none of them can be considered as buddhist deities. alsointeresting is the case of Shinkoo which appears as tennyo, Shakunyo and kokunyo whichare all buddhist deities. hokincicen's most complicated amalgamation case is the case ofthree mitrors(三鏡).particularly the three mitrors have been considered to cotrespond to1.Sun, Moon and Stars.2. Sky earth and Man, 3. dharmakaya(法身),sambhogakaya(報身)and nirmanakaya(応身),4.a(阿),ban(錢)and un(昨),5.buddha part, lotus partand vajra part.6.amida nyorai, Shaka nyorai and Yakushi nyorai which respectivelyshow dainichi nyorai's Ri(理),chi(智)and ji(事).7.dakini(旺枳尼),ganesa(聖天)and Sarasvati(弁財天),8.and also sangyokuio(三玉女),from taoism. in other words itis a complicated amalgamation case that includes sets of 3 three units, starting from theThree bright(三光),that is to say sun, Moon and stars, and including various buddhisideities, along with sanskrit letters or even Taoist deities. without doubt, this exampleshows that the amalgamation patterns inhokinciden cn be extremely comnplicated, ancthat they are not limited only to buddhist or Shinto, but also to taoism.The final case of amalgamation has to do with the names of Gozu tenno(牛頭天王)and banko(盤牛).while it is known that banko(盤古)is a deity from chinese mytholo-gy, the origin of gozu tenno is not very clear. in any case those two deities change theirname according to their current place. particularly, gozu tenno is the name used when inworld of human. while he is named tengyosho(天形星)when in heavens, or shoki noMikado(商貴帝)whenin oshaio(王舎城)(rajagrha) the other hand banko can be
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies(1
named as daibon Tenno(大梵天王)(brahma) ifin the upper world or kenrojishin(堅牢地神)(prthivi) ifin the lower world. while his suijaku is not born, he is called banko daio(盤牛大王).his honii is everlasting and is called dainichi nyorai(大日如来)〓).in this casewe can understand that significant factor of the name is the place where a deity exists.It is not clear if the syncretistic case of banko and gozu tenno occurred in china o1Japan, but it is clear that the mixture of buddhism and chinese religion started from thebeginning of introduction of buddhismin china. actually, hokinaiden's final chapter called〓oniu sukuyo kyo(文殊宿曜経)is about divination of Esoteric buddhism (Sukuyodo宿曜道)which was introduced to china and mixed with chinese philosophy. for this reason wecan assure that the amalgamation process had already started in china and continued alscin Japan.
4.Conclusion
From the following examples we can assume that the syncretistic model that appears inmedieval onmyodo, is very complicated and can't be understood as a simple buddhisticdeity - Shinto deity correlation. it is more precise to think of it as a combinatory tool thallinks various deities or other entities. without doubt, conventional Shinbutsu shugo casesappearinhokinaiden, but there are cases that seem irregular or quite complicated. while itis understood that inokinciden a general distinction between buddhistic deities andShinto deities (for example the distinction between sanbo kichinichi and kami kichinichi) exists.sometimes it appears that this distinction is ignored or very difiicult to define, and havecases of Shinbutsu Shugo, where both honii and suiiaku are from shinto or are both fromBuddhism, or even amalgamation to entities that are obviously out of the sphere or Shintoor buddhism. For this reason we may speak more precisely about "shinbutsuetc shugo"神仏等習合,than simply Shinbutsu Shugo, since the amalgamation patterns are not limit-ed only to shinto or buddhism. we are notin a position to know if those entities outside ofShinto or buddhism were understood as something completely unrelated to those two bymedieval Japanese thinkers, but without a doubt we can understand that there is a tendencyto unify all those spheres into one syncretistic system.1)shinto taikei volume 16,onmyodo, tokyo,1987,pp.36～37.2as above p.42.
The japanese association of Indian and Budhist Studies)concerning Shinbutsu Shugo in medieval japanese onmyodo a. dRAkakis)3)as above pp.441.4)as above pp.62～63.5)as above p.64.6)as above p.32.7)as above p.40.(key words onmyodo(陰陽道),hokinaicen(内伝),shinbutsu Shugo(神仏習合)(Graduate student, hokkaido university)財団法人仏教伝道協会英訳大蔵経翻訳叢書BUDdaARITa
INaISEoFBuDd'TS(佛所行讃)
Translated by charles willemenB5変形判定価5,250円(税込)
