The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe classification ofthe buddhakaya theory in the abhisamayulamkora.The lnterpretation ofthe twenty-one undefled qualitiesNakaMuRa hodo1.IntroductionThe abhisamayalamkora is said to be the work attributed to Maitreya that summariz-es the prajnaparamita-literature from a soteriological perspective. The buddhakaya( embodimnent of the buddha') theory described in the chapter 8 of this text has been inter-preted as a threefold or a fourfold embodiment systemn. Several Studies have been made onthis buddhakaya theory by h. amano), h. sakuma3), j. J. Makransky4)etc. however, little attention has been given to arya-vinuktisena, who wrote the oldest connnentaty in ex-istence, and to the threefold embodiment interpretation. The purpose of this paper is to in-vestigate the buddhakaya theory in the abhisamayalamkura and to examine theclassification of that.2.The buddhakaya Theoryin the abhisamaydlamkaraThe buddhakaya theory in this textis fonmed of threefold enbodinnent: svabhovikakoythe etnbodinnent of the buddha in his essehce'), sambhogikakothe embodiment of the bud-dha in his enioyment' ) and nairmanikakoy"the embodiment of the buddha in his manifesta-tions').on the contrary, several commentators, Haribhadra for example, construct the bud-dhakay(  the embodiment in dharmd') as the fourth embodiment. Now i will focus on thetwenty-one undefiled qualities vl,〓-6) and the teim dharmakaycvii,6), which de-cides the buddhakaya theoty as threefold or fourfold, and clarify the distinction betweerthe reading of arya-vimuktisena, haribhadra, ratnakarasanti and abhayakaragupta.〓chapter 8, verse l (definitionof the svabhovikakoya)the svabhavikakyof the muni possesses the essential nature of the undefiled nirasrava) quali-ies (tharma) that have obtained the purity in totality. (v,1))Chapter 8, verses 2-6(the twenty-one undefiled qualities)
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe classification of the buddhakaya Theory in the abhisamayalamkara (h. nakamuRa)(83)(1)the [thirty-seven] factors for enlightenment,(2)the [ four forms of] measurelessness,(3)thc [eight classes of] liberations,(4) [the achievementof nine meditative] phase,…(21) the to-al omniscience: the dharmakoya is designated thus. (vii,2-6)。Since the twenty-one undefiled qualities (v,2-6) are described within the explanation onthe svabhauikakoya, the dharmakaya vi,6) indicates the svabhouikakuya. here, howev-er. arises a contradiction between the verses. in verse l itis defined that the essential natureof the undefled qualities invests the svabhavikakoya. in verse o,conversely, it would bedefined that the dharmakoya, or svabhavikakoya in this case, is an aggregate of qualities asan embodiment.arya-vimuktisena's interpretationBecause the suffix[ta is deleted, * dharmatakay( "the embodiment in the nature of dharma') isstated [by the term*dharmakoyav,6)]. because otherwise the * dharmakonya would becomean aggregate(*kaya) of the qualities(*aharma).By intenpreting the dharmakoya not as an aggregate of qualities but as the * dharmatakayc,namely the svubhouikakoya, arya-vimnuktisena settles this contradiction in the sarne frame-work of the threefold embodiment system as the abhisamayulmkura.Haribhadra's Interpretationafter having explained the first embodimnent (svabhavikakaya), the second dharmakya fotmedfrom the qualities, such as the methods to concentrate one's thinking on the [four」] matters etc.,that consist of the gnosis ffree from discursive conceptualization, is to be explained.〓Haribhadra takes the dharmakoy as an embodiment separately and interprets these quali-ties as this embodiment from the viewpoint of the fourfold embodiment systemRatnakarasanti's interpretation(sudahamaf)The term*harmakoyav,6)is said to be an aggregate (tshogs) of the qualities(*tharma).That means the essential nature of [the aggregate of the qualities] is the svabhavikukaya of theBuddha.9)
by describing the svabhoikakoya from the position of the threefold embodiment system.ratnakarasanti (suddhamati) interprets the dharmakaya not as an embodiment but ana-gregate of qualities and the svabhavikakoya as the essential nature of this aggregate ofqualities.
Ratnakarasanti's Interpretation arottama)as the teacher has stated, the enlightenment on the qualities of the mahayana is the prainaparamitd
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt studies84)The classification of the buddhakaya Theory in the abhisamaydlamkora .nakaMuRa)here. that lprajnoporamita ] is infinity. That means: the attainment of all the buddha qualities,which is caused by that [prainaparamita], is infinity... the dharmakaya viii,6) is the unde-fled aggregate ofthe qualities of the buddha.within the description on the sambhogikakaya, Ratnakarasanti (Sarottama) stated abovequoted interpretation and interprets the dharmakoyu dot as a embodimnent but an aggrc-gate of qualities and the sambhogikakaya as an embodiment possessing the undefiled quali-ties from the standpoint of the threefold embodiment systemabhayakaragupta's interpretationThese [twenty-one undefiled] qualities of the buddha, such as the [thirty-seven] factors for en-lightennent etc., consisting of the totally pure gnoses free from conventional discursive conceptu-alization is includedin [ the description of] the svabhavikakaya.11)he term dharmakayvi,6) stands for an aggregate ofthe undefiled qualities.By describing the svabhauikakaya from the position of the threefold embodiment systemabhayakaragupta interprets the dharmakaya not as an embodiment but an aggregate ofqualities and the svabhavikakaya as the essential nature ofthis aggregate.3.conclusion
According to the threefold embodiment interpretation, the twenty-one undefiled qualitiesare broghut under the description of the svabhavikakoya or the sambhogikakoya, and according to the fourfold embodiment interpretation under the description on the dharmakayaas an embodiment independently. the intetpretation of the term dharmakaya(v,6)isalso different within the threefold embodiment system. apya-viimuktisena interprets thedharmakoy as the svubhavikakoya from the positioh of the threefold enbodiment system.Inthis respect his interpretation seems to be close to the abhisamayalumakara, howeverthat has not been taken over by other commmentators after him. haribhadra identifies thedharmakaya as the fourth emnbodiment formed from the undefiled qualities. Ratnakarasant.(suddhamati and sarottama ) and abhayakaragupta, contrary to ary-vimuktisena, interpre1the dharmakaya as an aggregate of qualities. ratnakarasanti (sarottama) explained that theundefled qualities belong to the sambhogikakaya.Studies have so far focused on iust the contrast between the threefold and fourfold em-bodiment system. From this study it has been found that there are at least three kinds ofthreefold embodiment systems:(1)atya-vimuktisena,(2) Ratnakarasanti (suddhamat )
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiststudiesThe classification of the buddhakaya Theoty in the abhisamayalamkara (. nakamura)(85)Table. 1 The interpretationon the term dharmakaya vii,6and abhayakaragupta and (3)Ratnakarasanti (Sarottama). what has been said so farshows that eachtype of these threefold embodiment systems and also the fourfold embodi-ment system result from the interpretation of the ambiuous term dharmakoyvii,6).afurther direction of this study will be to explore the philosophical background of the theseinterpretations on the dharmakaya (v,6).dotes: hhiscmayulamkaranamaprainaporamitopadescsostrakuariku, (Skt., Tib.) hyod [hyodo, kazuo(兵藤一大).a sdy ofthe abhisamayulamkara, commentaryo the praina-poramitosutra. kyoto: bun'eidoshoten, 200.2)amano, hirofusa(天野宏英)."buddhakaya Theoty of haribhadra." journal of religious studies, 37.tokyo. japanese association forReligious studies,1964.3)sakuma, hidenori. "The classification of the dharmakayeChapter of the abhisamayalamkara by indian commentators. the threefold and the fourfoldBudchakaya Theories." journal ofindichilosophy.dordrecht: kluwer academic publishers4)makransky, john j. buddhahood embodtied. sources of controversyiindfia andTiber. albany, new york: state university of new york press,1997.5)abhisamayulamkara,(skt.) hyodo [2sarvakaram visuddhim ye dharmah prapta nirasravah  svabhaviko munelkayas tesam prakrtilaksaahtib.) hyodo [2thub pa'i ngo bo nyid sku ni zag pa mecpa'i chos gang dag / thob gyur rnam kun rnam dag pa / de dag fang bzhin mtshan nyid cn〓,1)6)ibid., (Skt.)hyodo [](1-2)bodhipaksapramanani(3)vimoksa(4)anupurvasah/(21)sarvakarajnata ceti dharmakayo 'bhidhiyate /tib.) hyodo [(1)byang chub phyogs mthun(2)tshad med dang i3rnam par thar dang(4)mthar gyis ni i〓(21)rnam pa thams cad mkhyen nyid dang i chos kyi sku zhes brjod pa yivi, 2ab, 6cd)7)aryapancauimsatisahasrikaprajnaparamitopadesasastrabhisamayalamkaravrtti ;, (tib.)〓〓787)ka19〓,p[88](5185)ka226: rkyen phyis pas chos nyid kyi sku zhes bya ste /gzhan du chos mnams kyi sku ni chos kyi sku zhes bya ba yin pa'i phyir.8)abhisamadlamnkaranamaprajnaparamitopadesasastravivrti , (Skt.)amano, hirofusa. abhisamayolamkara-karika-sustrg-vivrti : haribthadra's commemtryo the abhiscmayalamkara-kariko-sustra / edlited
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies86)the classification of the buddhakaya Theory in the abhisamayulamkura .nakamurafor the first time from sskrit manuscripf. kyoto: heirakuji-shoten,2000,103.17-18prathamam kayam evam nirddisya dvitiyam dharmmakayam nisprapancajnanatmakamanasravasmrtyupasthanadirupam aha/ (tib.) d3793)Ja11b5-6,p(5191)ja15b3dltar sku dang po bstan s gnyis pa chos kyi sku spos pa med pa'i ye shes kyi bdag nyidzg pamed pa'i dran pa nye bar gzhag pa la sgs pa'ingo bo/9)abhisamayalamkarakurikovrttisudlchamati; tib.)d(3801)〓a15-6,(5199)〓a228b: chos kyiskuni chos kvitshogssu brjod pa yin te / gang gi rang bzhin sangs rgyas rnams kyi ngo bo nyid kyi sku'ozhes bya ba'ilon to f10)aryastasuhcsrikoprainaparamitopanjika sarottama, (Skt.) jaini. Padamanabhshreevarma. aryastasahasrikayhraineparamitoyah saratamakhya panjiko. pataliputram: kasiprasada-jayasavala-anusilana Samstha,1979,1 yathoktah sastur eva mahayanadharma-sambodha iha prajnaparamita / tasya aparyantata / tatkaranasya sarvabuddhadharmanam samuda-gamasyaparyantatayety arthah"dharmakaya" iti /anasravo buddhanam dharmarasihtib.)D(03) tha-2043,925200) tha27b5-228a ji skad du ston pa nyid kyis theg pachen po'imchog yang dag par rtags pani 'dir shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin par gsungs sode'imumed pa ni de'i rgyu ste / sangs rgyas thams cad kyi chos yang dag par sgrub pa mu med pa zhesbya ba'i donto"chos kyi sku zhes bya bani sangs rgyas tnamns kyi zg pa med pa"i chos kyitshogs so f11)aryastasahasrikoprainaporamitovrtti marmakaumudi ; (tib.) d(80s) da197b5,92(5202)〓 nam pa thams cad du yongs su dag pa'i kun rdzob kyingo boi spros pa med pa rtogs pa'i bdag nyid byang chub kyi phyogs la sogs pa'i sangs rgyas kyi chos demams ni ngo bo nyid kyi skus yang dag par bsdus pa ste /12)ibid.;(tib.) d(3805) da198b7,p[92(5202)da223bl: chos kyisku zhes pani 'dit zag pa med pa'i chos kyitshogs la/(Key words)hhisamayulamkura, buddhakoy
