The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSrituals and the dharmabhanaka (Preacher) in the swarna (pra bhusotamasutrc:Asan example of mahayana Sutras adopting esoteric ritualsHINO eun
Introductory notesThe suvarna (pra)bhasottamasutrd) has both elements of Mahayana and esotericBuddhism even in its shortest versioc7),and the esoteric elements (spells and rituals)increase along with the textual extension. This paper focuses on the rituals and the role of thedharmabhanaka (preacher) in suv, especially in chapter o caturmaharaja-parivarta and chap-ter 7 Sarasvatl-parivarta. 〓 dharmastavanapuja," which is explained in caturmaharaja-parivar-ta aiming to serve the dharmabhanaka, has the framework of a puja common in mahayanajutras), yet it also has the features of esoteric rituals, i.e. performing rituals to a sole deity andexpecting worldly benefits4). this paper clarifies these two features of "dharmasravanapuja,"and demonstrates that it incotporates two rituals -snanakaiman" in sarasvatl-parivarta and"the ritual for summoning vaisravana(多聞天勧請儀礼)"in the additional part of caturmaha-taja-parivarta of the largest version of uinto this sutra. in addition, i wouldlike to suggest the hypothesis that the dharmabhanaka had an important role in leading thsrituals in this sutra, and the dharmabhanaka participated in the formation of this sutra" dharmasravanapuia""dharmasravanapuja"explained in chaptero, caturmaharaja-parivarta, has a frame-work and contains materials comnmon to mahayana sutras, e.g. using flowers, incense, per-fume etc. and serving the dlharmabhanaka. hiowever, the relationship between the executorof this " puia"(the king) and the deities (catummaharaja) is not familiar in mahayana sutrasbut is instead esoteric. Now, i will build a viewpoint called "relationship on the benefitsbetween the deity, the dharmabhanaka and the listeners"" around this "puia"" for tentativeuse, and i will examine its esoteric features by comparing it with "snanakarman" and " theritual for summoning vaisravana."The motif in which caturmaharaja protects the devotees of buddhism, is quite popularin buddhist canon, not only in Mahayana but from the era of nikayas). caturmaharaia's
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies2)rituals and the dharmabhanaka (preacher) in the suvarna (pra)bhasottamasutra (e. hino)function of protecting king's land' described in this chapter is unique to this sutra, but itcan be considered as an extension of this function. i refer to this relationship, in whichbuddhist teachings give caturmaharaja religious merit, and caturmaharaia in urn, protectthe devotees, as "a."The claim of necessity in performing the service (puja) for the dharmabhanaka is also apopular motif, but only in mahayana sutras where is explained as the duty of the listenersof teachings' . icall this relationship, in which the dharmabhanaka preaches and the listen-ers serve the diharmabhanaka, as ".Then, the interchange of benefits around the " puja"" is described. a synopsis is as follow.ing: the service with incense (gandha) is given by the king to the dharmabhanaka(→Thesmoke of incense (gandha-dhupa) reaches the dwellings of caturmnaharaia and their retinuesin the sky and decorates them with odours and lights(I return caturmaharaia pro-tects the king's land (d).that is to say, the service to the dharmabhanaka (b) is transferredto caturmaharaja by means of the smoke of incense (c) and the transference leads a directrelation between caturmaharaja and the king as the executor of this " puia""(d).This rela-tionship of mutual benefit (C-d)is to be considered as the peculiar feature of this " puja" incomparison with other mahayana pujas. The whole relationships are diagrammedin Fig. 1.Fig.1.relationship on the benefits around "edharmasravanapuja"Comparison with "snanakarman" in Sarasvati-parivartaThen i will compare the previous relationship with the relationships surrounding  snana-karman" in sarasvati-parivarta. in this chapter, a female deity, Sarasvati, teaches " snanakar-man," in which one could sumonn her and receive worldly benefits, on the beings (sattva.containing the listeners and the preacher of sun. "snanakarman" can be fegarded as a pure es-oteric ritual becouse of the features such as mantras andrituals. performed toa sole deity andworldly benefits suchas a long life and health. the interchange between sarasvati and the cx-ecutor is completed in this ritual, and no religious supermnundane merit is mentioned here.This esoteric ritual. explained by verses u-107.3),appears unusual in terms ofMahayana doctrine. however, the proses (102.13-104.5,107.3-12)which appears in front of
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiesrituals and the dharmabhanaka (preacher) in the suvarna (pra )bhasottamasutra (e. hmno)(73)and behind the verses supply the context necessary to explain it. The proses explain thatSarasvati is among the retinue of caturmaharaja, and she enjoys benefits through "puja,"so in return she offers to bestow the eloquence, wisdom and the method of this ritual. Theinterchange of benefitin catummaharaja-parivarta thus necessitates the explanation of thisritual within Sarasvati-parivarta (Fig.2)."Snanakarman"" is considered to have been introduced to the buddhist cahons throughsuv. there are no known examples of rituals dedicatedto sarasvati in mahayata texts, andonly a few examples existin some esoteric texts, obviously formed later than u). moreover, sarasvati-parivarta has some verses in parallel with the harivamsa, and the natureof Sarasvati in this sutra closely resembles that found in hinduism.Thus "snanakarman"and the depiction of sarasvati in this ritual can be considered to have been transferred di-rectly from the ritual in hinduism directly. it is often said that the esoteric rituals in bud-dhism originate in hinduism,and this "snanakarman" can be viewed as an example. andin this suv, from the contextof " dharmasravanapuia"icaturmaharaia-parivarta, ""snana-karma" that is direct interchange between the executor of the ritual and the deity -can be brought into mahayana buddhist context.fig. 2. Relationshipon the benefits around "snanakarman"(e: bestowing the eloquence/teaching snanakarman", f:bestowing wisdomfteaching "snanakarman",j:interchange of benefits in snanakarman", dotted lines express the supplimentof caturmaharaia-parivarta)comparison with "the ritual for summoning vaisravana'Finally, i will compare "dharmasravanapuia" with "the ritual for summoning vaisravapa," found in caturmaharaja-parivarta at the stage of svc3. This ritual is explained byvaisravana, the chief of caturmaharaja. in it, the executor summons vaisravana by usingfour mantras and painting, and expects worldly benefits such as money, as well as preternatural power from him. This is citediishamentiamnag jing毘沙門天王経(t.1244and can be seen a pure esoteric ritual. The method of this ritual is explained by vaisravanaas a retumn of "dharmasravanapuja," a continuation of protecting the land by caturmahara-ja, just like "snanakarman" of sarasvati. and this lacks the description of necessity for thedeity to explain the ritual, which "snanakarman" lacks as well and "dharmasravanapuja"
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies74)rituals and the dharmabhanaka (preacher) in the suarna (pra)bhasottamasutra . hino)includes. Thus, this ritual is also can be considered to be brought in on the base of"dharmasravanapuia"" (Fig.3).fig.3.relationship on the benefits of "the ritual for summoning vaisravana多聞天勧請儀礼)" dotted lines express the supplimentof caturnaharaia-parivartaFinal remarksThus my hypothesis is as following: in suv, "dharmasravanapuia"i caturmaharaja-parivarta is formed from the elements familiar to Mahayana buddhism, such as having ca-turmnaharaja protect the devotees of buddhism and presenting service to the dharmnabhana-ka as a quasi-ritual of sorts. The esoteric rituals such as "snanakarman" and the ritual forsummmoning vaisravana are incorporated on the contextual and benefit-related basis of"dharmasravanapuja" at the later stage, maybe frohinduism. This hypothesis is co-frmed by the history of textual extensions, in that the shortest version c) has " puia'and lacks "snanakatman," while the sanskrit text, the second-shortest version, includes"snanakarman," and only the largest versio) includes the ritual of vaisravana."In addition, in the sanskrit text, the descriptions of the deities and the rituals dedicatedto them are limited to five chapters from caturmaharaja-parivarta to samjnaya-parivarta,as are the descriptions of praise for the dharmabhanaka.i "dharmasravanapuja"" for thedharmabhanaka was formed as a quasi-ritual, and this " puia" led to the inclusion of the es-oteric rituals into suv, it would be possible that the preaching of the dharmabhanaka whowould have had frequent contact with the religious practices of Hinduism has participatedin bringing in or forming these rituals. Thatis, the dhatmabhanaka introduced these (quasi-)ritual into this sutra for their suitability in the oral preaching, and what the dharmab-hanakas's preaching reflected the written text. The possibility that the dharmabhanakacommitted the formation of mahayana sutras has already been pointed out13) ,and if thehypothesis mentioned above hold true, this papef thus cites p as one of the examples.一)survarnabhosottamnasutra, dcs goldgl-utra, ein nskrittext des hoyan-budtthismus,nach dehadschriften ud mit iilfe der tibetischen und chinesischenbertragungen, johanne
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiesrituals and the dharmabhanaka (preacher) in the suvarn (pra)bhasottamasutra . HIno)(75)nobel,1937,otto Harrassowitz, leipzig.2)jin guangming jing金光明経trans. dharmaksema(t.663).3)the general pujia in mahayana buddhism is the service to buddhas, stupas,the sacred books and monks by using items such as tlower (puspa), perfume (dhupa) , incense(gandha),garland (malya), etc., as are described in mnany nahayana sutras, including theprajnaparamita, the saddharmapundarrka, the dsabhumika, the gandhha.4)Mentioned here are the features common to the rituals in sun. in addition, reciting mantraand dharanis, drawing the obiect of the ritual, making a mandalas and mudras could be enumeratedas the general features of the esoteric rituals (see matsunaga [17」).5)jingnungmiyuisheng wang jing金光明最勝王経trans. yijing (t.665).6)the character ocaturmaharaia is researched in komoro [21], hashitnoto[136].especially the function of"protecting the sacred books and the dharmabhanaka who carries it," is described in stuti-parivartain the astusahasriko-prainaparamito, dharanl-parivarta in the saddharmapundarika, and othersourcs.
7)remnarkable examples are come from dharmabhanaka-parivarta anddharmabhanakanusamsa-parivarta in the saddharmapundarikua. for other exammples, see shizutani1974].8)icannot find other examples, and watanabe[1918]also testifies. similatexamples in the esoteric texts is seeniuolhomi ji ing陀羅尼集経第十一(t.901),bukongiuunsushenhizhenyam jing不空絹索神變真言経第二(T.1092).9)The similarities havebeen noted between "snanakarman"" and the harivams calcutta ed.328-3219crit. ed〓3:3:6cd-7)(nobel [1951]),anda parallel between verses praising sarasvati in suc3 and versespraising durga in the harivascrit. ed., vol.2 app. no. 8, pp.7)(watanabe[1918,ludvik [01]).10)The similarities include the character as the deity of river sarasvatiread from "snanakarman"(see nobel [191]),assimilation to vac (see lal[19, Gonda[1985]),assimilation to durga (see note 7 and nagano [188]).The similarities are reexaminedin detail by ludvik [1].these resemblances are contrasted with the character ofCaturmaharaja, that is unique in buddhist canons and not similar to that in hinduism (seeMevissen [1] etc.).11)many researchers make this claim, including Matsunaga[1978pp.87-89.12)t. suzuki has treated these five chapters-caturmaharaia-Sarasvati-, sri-, drdha- and Saminaya-parivarta-and named these  the five chapters on thevarious gods and goddesses." suzuki [2builds a hypothesis that " the unchanged intention ofthe compilers" of suy was "an attempt of buddhist ot survive in the indian religious world byemphasizing the value, the usefulness and the completeness of [Mahayana] buddhism."13)the possibility that the dharmabhanaka participated in the formation of Mahayana sutra isargued for long since shizutani[y nishimura[1992]and others, and watanabe [1970]builds a hypothesis on the saddharmapundarika that dharmabhanaka participated in changing ancadding some parts or chapters of the sutras before they were compiled.(due to the limited space the references ate omitted)
