The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudieSThe vedic calendar and the rituals(1)SAkaMto-Goto Junko0.the astronomical knowledge or the calendar system in the vedic period until about themiddle of the lst millennium b.c., though scarcely investigated hitherto, differs fundamen-tally from the later indian astronomy or astrology after the jyotisa (as a vedanga "limb of theveda' belonging to the post vedic period) onward. This paper offers remarks about basic ele-ments of the vedic calendar, especially in its early stage, drawn from materials found to agreat extent fortuitously by the author.1.The peculiarity of the vedic calendartime itself simply goes forward without pause and without teturn. but nature repeatsvarious periodic changes: day and night, waxing and waning of the moon, lengthening andshortening of the daylight accompanied by the north-or southward movement of the sun,rotation of the constellations as well as the seasons, etc. The regularity of those phenomenamust have deeply impressed our ancestors, which led them, on the one hand to the conceptof the highest principle ruling the phenomena, and on the other hand to the reckoning oftime for practical use. the time-feckoning systematized into the calendar brought forthrevolutionary developments in human life. for secular as well as religious activities.The periodicity of nature is expressed in old indo-aryan language by the nouns to theverbal root*h,er "to ft, fugen ri- (masc.) "the right time in exact accordance with thetemmporal cycle' means above all "monthly period fit for conception of (children by ) womenand more generally 'season〓; yti-nt.) "the cosmic order which regulates not only nature,but also human conduct'(〓3.2.str.1,3.3.,n.5)is the most important concept in the earlyvedic literature. The simplest but lifelong obligatory ritual for those who have set up theirsacrificial fire is the agnihotra, the daily offering to the fire at sunset and sunrise, which in-cited them to observe the sun's movement. no less important are the new and full moonsat which the new and full moon Sacrifices ursapurnamasaiu) as well as most of the vedic
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSrituals take place. anaccurate forecast of the new and full moons was indispensable.The ancient indian calendar in the vedic period until about the 〓 century b.c. as at-tested in the Satihitas, the brahmanas (inclusive of the prose-portion of the blackYajurveda-samhitas), the old stage of the upanisads and of the srautasutras, is a lunisolarcalendar based on naked eye observations of heavenly bodies, which sets special impor-tance on the moo's motionin relation to the movements of the sun and the fixed stars. Thecalendar date is determnined by the moo's phase and position relative to the stars, whichare observedin the nocturnalsky〓2,3.1.,3.2.str.19).when the moon is seen fron the earth in the same direction as the sun, that is. in con-junction with the sun, the moon does not appear in the nocturnal sky. The moon is consid-ered to stay vas) at home (ama) with the sun in this night called amavdsyi- rutri-late1ratri-) "the night of (the moon's) staying overnight at home"(→3,3.2.,.4.aafter that,the thin new moon appears in the west after the sunset, changing its phase by waxing andwaning, the moonrise or moonset becomes later as the sunset or sunrise every day on aver-age by about51minutes (presumably the origin of the timne unit muhurtai- th of a solar day]→seq.8.), consequently, the moon comes again into conjunction with the sun and disap-pears〓during the period between two successive coniunctions with the sun (thelunation about 29.solar days),1.e. the synodic month, the moon moves in its orbit, ap-roaching evety night a different star or star-group which becomes thereby invisible, untilit joins again with the sun. This phenomenon was understood as follows: the moo mascu-line god) stays every night with a different star or star-group (each regarded as a feminine di-vinity) situated on its path,28or29nights in total, and stays at home with the sun duringthe amavasya night (〓32,3..).The star (-group)s as well as the sun visited by the moonare named nciksatra- (nt.)"the place to which the moon attains (naksa-', commonly trans-lated "lunar mansion"or "mondhaus"(〓s.5).ndksatra- is attestedin the rgveda [vwhere the singular foem (nt.) always neans the sun, while the star i general is expressedby the word of indo-European origin*,ster-), str-Rv intr.pl. stbhih,nom.pl. tarah), latertdrakv,ataruku-tarayd-) and torlass. Skt., mia).after the rvon, the sun wasexcluded from the naksatras.〓n enumeration of the 28 naksatras, remarkable star (-group)s situated approximatelyequidistant on or near the moon's path, appears first in the atharvaveda [v(saunaka〓Ix7.1-5; not found in the paippalada-recension). The number of the naksatras is teduced into
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies27in the prose-portion of the kathaka-samnhita [KS]xxXIX13130,14ff. and the tait-tiriya-Samhita [TS〓v,10,1ff., but increased to29in the Maitrayani samnhita [S〓13,2015,12.The vatying number of the naksatras reveals the problem caused by the di-vergence between the sidereal month .e. the cycle of the moo's revolution relative to the stars:about27.32solar day7 days 8 hours) and the synodic month (about29.solar day〓ays hours)which is about z days 5 hours longer than the former due to the revolution ofthe earth around the sun. according to the 28or29)naksatras based on the synodicmonth. the moon's relation to the naksatras becomes unstable, by contrast, the27 Naksa-tras based on the sidereal month are in disaccord with the calendar date of the svnodikmonth(→3.1.).The 27naksatras model, preferred in the scholastic tradition, was trans.mitted to the post vedic work jyotisa, while the〓8 naksatras survived in the tradition ofthe av such as the av-parisista, and further in early popular calendars, traces of which re-main in the buddhist texts, e.g. the mahaniddesa38,4f. (pali canon), the sardulakarnava-dana51f. (divyavadana).in either case. the term naksatra means concrete heavenly bodiesrelated to the moon in the vedic literature, and to a large extent in early popular calendars.In this regard, it should not be forgotten that the stars near the bright moon or in coniunc-tion with the moon are invisible to the naked eye. The Naksatra at which the moon stayseach night can be only inferred fron attentive and continuous observation of the noctuinasky. In the jyotisa, the notion of the naksatras was transformed into the equally spacedzoes of the ecliptic. This marks the radical change froin primitive astronomy to mathematical astronomy asan exact science. for the details ofthe naksatras, s. seq. s.2.the calendar dayacalendar day is a solar day which begins originally at sunset, ie. a night and the fol-lowing daytime, as in the jewish or arabic calendar, since the date is determined by themoon's phase observed at night(→3.).Thus paurnamosi-(fem., [ratri-fratri-])"the fullmoon night' designates "the full moon day, i.e. the full moon night and the following day-time', identical with paurnamasdi- (nt. [ahn-]),in the same way, amavasya-means "theamavasya night and the following daytime', distaku- "the 8h night of the half month andthe following daytime', etc. This usage is frequent in the br and the ss, e.g. mSpi6,9:101,17f. yat paurnamasyam vamavasyayam vagnim adhattd, ubhe punyahe "That [one]sets up one's sacrificial fire in the daytime following the full moon night or the amavasya
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesnight, [that is to say] the both are auspicious days', vaitana-sutra31,1 maghyah purastadekudasyam saptudsavarah sattram upoyanto brahmanoktena dikseranin the daytimefollowing the 11 night (of the waxing half month) before the full moon situated at theMaghas (fem. pl. leonis c, etc.〓seq. 5.), at least 17 [persons], if they are undertaking asattra, should consecrate themselves according to the prescript in the bbaudhayana-ss〓vi13:260,5),katyayana-sS13,1,2gavamayanayaikastakoyam diksa The consecrationfor the gavamayana [takes place] in the daytime following the8 night of the waning halfof the magha month (ekastakd-). The reckoning of calendar days by the night is common,e.g. mSf i5,13:82,2-5yatra painca ratrih smhita vdset taj juhuyat . dascisv evo ritrisvantcmam hotavywhere one stays overnight for more thans successive nights, oneshould there make an offering [to Rudra vastospati]…after 10nights [have passed], oneshould make an offering on the last [day]'.This old calendar day systemis reflected in the agnihotra(〓);the offering at sunsetprecedes that at sunrise and is treated as representative of both offerings. itis further in-ferred that the prototype of the new and full moon sacrifices darsapurnamasaiu) beginswith the sunset of the amavasya or the full moon night, ie. the sacred night for upvq-sathi- "staying overnight near the sacrificial fire (with observance of sacrificial duties)'.Though the upavasatha designates the preparatory day for the new and Full moon Sacri-fices' in the systemof srauta-rituals, its original meaning survives in the uposatha ceremo-ny of buddhism and jainismIauposatha-upavasathd-).anew calendar day beginning at suntise as in the jyotisa seems, however, to have pre-vailed over that beginning at sunset, as the worship of the sun became predominant.3.The calendar month and the date31.acalendar month (m. mais-, maisa-, cp. mas-, candrimais-, cancrd- "the moon') is a synodicmonth starting with the amavasya night, during which the mooncomes into existence fromnon-existence, waxes to the full moon, wanes to disappearance. The moon's cycle is com-pared with the human life of birth, growth, decay and death; the new moon after the con-iunction symbolizes rebirth after death(→32., 3.3.,3.4.). The predominance of the con-iunction over the full moon in origin explains why the new moon sacrifice was givenmore weight than the Full Moon Sacrifice, cp. the two offerings ofthe agnihotra (→2The full moon (moon age 14.8)occurs when the moon is seen from the earth in the
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesopposite direction of the sun. The naksatras, which are fixed stars, gradually change theirpositionin the sky according to the annual revolution of the earth around the sun. inconse-quence, the naksatra at which the full moon lodges shifts every month. the calendarmonth is designated according to the naksatra at the full moon: e.g. the naksatra citr→the full moon night caitri-rtri-)the month caitra-. as an instrument to distinguish themonths from each other, the full moon night increased its importance.Amonth is composed ofa waxing half month (sukra-paksa- "bright wing') and a waninghalf month a-paksa- "black wing').The date is expressed by the night as counted fromthe amavasya night or the full moon night in each half month: e.g. distaka- "the8-h night ofthe sukra-paks-or the krsna-paksa-', in which the half moon (moon age about 7.2or 22)appears, means a calendar day composed of this night and the following daytime (〓.The lunation, though variable by more than hours according to the moo's speed inits orbit, is on average about29solar days9 ays 13 hours).due to the divergencebetween the lunar cycle (month) and the solar cycle (day), the coniunction as well as the fulmoon occurs every month at different time, also in the daytime, from which arises difficultyin determining the amavasya or the full moon night. actually it was not rare to begin theNew or the full moon sacrifice one day before or after the coirect date, for which theexpiation prayasciti-, itia-) is prescribed in the br and the SS. a similar problem con.cerning the uposatha is discussedin the vinaya of the buddhist canonseq.9.).The divergence between the synodic month and the solar year (on average about365.2solar days) causes the ful moon or coniunction to shift by about 11.solar days a vear(→seq. 4.). consequently, the full moon or the conjunction changes every year its relation tthe vernal and autumnal equinoxes and the summmer and winter solstices as well as its posi-tion relative to the fixed stars. The full moon is situated often between two naksatras indiscordance with the fixed month's name based on the naksatra at the full moon.The above mentioned inaccuracy always accompanies the vedic calendar, which isbased upon naked eye observations of the moon's position relative to the stars.beside the actual calendar used in the vedic period, a notional calendar appears in thebr, according to which a month is composed of3o days and a year of 12months, namely360days. this conception seems to underlie the29naksatras in the MS(→1, sea. 5.) andto have prepared the notions of tithi-and muhurti-→sq. 8.). This calendar svstem is fa-vored by the brahmin scholars in theological speculation regarding the complete year
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSthe vedic calendar and the rituals(1)(j. sakAMoto-Goto)(samvatsara-) which symbolizes eternity(→sq.4.).3.2.The moo's marriage with the sunsvx8XI1)The marriage ofthe moon (king soma) and the Sun goddess Surya (daughter of Savitr)symbolizes the conjunction of the moon and the sun, their wedding implies the new moonSacrifice (str.3-5),which is further combined with the rituals such as the animal Sacrifice atthe summer or winter solstice (str.1sq. 5.f.).The word som- is used in manifoldsenses: soma sap squeezed froma certain plant (most probably ephedra), the gods" foodwhich brings immortality (amyta-, "ambrosia" ) and the mo).1.satyenoittabhita bhumiy enottabhit dyrenaditrais tisthanti civi soo dchi sritcihThe earth is upheld by the truth tyd-) , the heaven is upheld by the sun. by the cosmic law(yt.,n.5),the aditya-gods stand; soma (the moon) is clinging on the heaven.2.somenaditya balinah somena prthivi mahi tho naiksatranam emupdisthe soma ahithBy soma, the aditya-gods are powerful; by soma, the earth is great. and then, Soma is placedon the lap of these naksatras.3.somam mamyate papivan yt sampimiscinty osadhimmam y brahmano viduir  nd tisyas-nati kis cuThe sacrificer] thinks that he has drunk soma, when [the priests] squeezethe plant (stalk of Soma). whoever [may be on earth. ] does not eat Sonna ( the moon) which[only-] the priest-scholars know.The offering of Soma sap to the gods on the day following the amavasya night brings forththe moon's rebirth and waxing, which suggests the origin of the new moon sacrifice(→〓..a)) on this day, the moon in conjunction with the sun is situated high in the brightheaven and invisible, being covered with sunrays rasmi- masc. pl.)4. achdidvidhanair gupito barhatuih soa raksitcih gravam ic chrmcin tisthasi md te asnatpdrthivchprotected by the arrangements for covering (ie. sunrays?), guarded by thosebelonging to the height (i.e. winds?, cf. str.5),o soma, you stand hearing the very press stone(of the soma plant). one who belongs to the earth does not eat you.5. yait tua deva prapibamti l tt a pyoyase puhyuh somasya raksita smanam masa akti〓when [the gods] begin to drink you (as soma sap offered in the New moon sacrifice),o god,then you (as the moon) swell again. The wind is Soma's protector, the month (miisa-) is thebasic form of the yearsThe str. 6-17describe the wedding procession of Sutya on the asvins' wagon→q. 5.)13.suryaya vahatih pragatl savita yam anasitl aghasu hanyante goorjumyoh pry uhyate〓The wedding procession of Surya, whom Savitr sent off, has started. [when the full or newmoon is situated] at the [naksatra of]aghas (fem.pl.,av x1,13maghas〓, cattle
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesare slaughtered [for the sacrifice]. [when.. ] at the [naksatra of the] arujunis (fem.du., vphalgunis), surya is carried around [from the father's to the bridegroom's house]The str. 18-1vv81,1f.) praise the wonderful faculty (maya-) of the sun and themoon, especially the moon which repeats rebirth and guarantees long life (→3.).18. purvapairam carato mayayaitau krifantau pdri yato adhvarcimvisuyyo bhuivand-bhicdista  ytir anyo vidadhai joyate puinchalternatively [going] ahead and behind[each other], these two wander with wonderful faculty maya-) (i.e. the moon proceeds thesun before the conjunction, after which the sun proceeds the moon),the two playing childrengo around the ritual way. the one (the sun) observes all the beings, the other (the moon),disposing the periods (months, seasons, etc.: r),is born again.19. navo-navo bhaati jdyamaohnom ketuir usaisam ety agrcmbhogam devebhyo vi dadhaty〓ypr candraimas firate dirghiim du[The moon] becomes [each time] new andnew, when he is born, as bright sign (ketui-) of days, he goes on the top of dawns ie. appearsbefore the dawn).he, coming [to the earth in the amavasya night?], distributes the shate tthe gods. the bright moo (candraimas-) makes [us] to accomplish [our] long lifetime[str.2-47are omnitted.]〓.3.The moon's marriage with the naksatras: prose-portion ofthe black yajurvedaa person afficted by yaiksm- or rujayaksmg-) "consumptio"4/ is compared with thewaning moon. The moon's rebirth and waxing are combined with theritual for the healingfrom this disease, the mantras for which are parallel to rvx85,18f.(→.2.).with regardto this ritual, the origin of the waning and waxing of the moon caused by its marriage witthe naksatras is related (Spi27:21,4-1,S17,12,TSPi3,5,1-3).MSP〓2,:21,9praidpatir wi somaya rdine duhitfdadcn hksafrani. sai rohinyam evavasannetarasu. ta dnupeyamanch punar agacchamis. tam rojayaksmendgrahayat. sd nirasravat. tasmadrajayaksmdigrhito nihsravati. s vdi prajdpatim evopadhavat. tim praidpatir abravid, ytaimbruhiti. sd rtim abravid. ydtha sdirvosv evd samapad vdisaniti. tismad esa sarvasv evd samdvadasati. prajapati, verily, gave to king soma (the moon) his daughters, [who were ] the naksatras.he (king sona) lodged only at rohini, not at the others. those who were not being approached[by king soma] went back [to prajapati].[made him grasped by the rajayaksmd-. he (ie.his body fuids 「 Soma sap]) dripped out (kS trm ivosusyt he shriveled like grass). thereforeone grasped by rojayaksmd-.e. one's body fluids [urine, sweat, blood, etc.])drips out. he (kingSoma), verily, ran for help indeed to p. p said to him: "say [what accords with] the cosmic order(ie. swear an oath).he said [what accords with] the cosmic order (ie. swore an oath)thecosmic order is so, ] as yatha) I shall (subj. vaisani) lodge equally indeed at all [the p'sdaughtersnaksatras」]. Therefore this (King soma) lodges equally indeed at all [thep's daughters].
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSThe marital customi older times seems to be reflected in this myth. in the TS, thenumber of the prajapati's daughters is 33, but not designated as Naksatras. noteworthy isthe significance of Rohini(→5,usually identified with aldebaran (tau ) which was sit-uated approximately at the vernal equinox around the 12century b.c3.. Themoon as food of the gods or indra  the sun)sathapatha-brahmapai,4The moon's and the sun's movements are explained from the viewpoint of circulation ofthe food for indra and the gods(〓. indra is equated with the sun, as usualin the sb.a)The former part of this br relates that both indra (the sun) and king soma ( the moon)stay in the amavasya night at home, ie. on earth, with a theological etymology of amovasya-(→1)fromama adv. and vcsa-" of vcisu-m. ie. indra) andnt. (ie. king soma).On the offering of purodasa (akind ofpan-cake) to the pair of lndra and agni]on the offering of purodasa (a kind of pan-cake) to the pair of indra and agni]" tenaitim ritrim sahdjagama. sd vai devanam vaisur. viro hy esam.te deva abruvan. / advai no dya vaisur vasatiyo h pravatsid iti.…1… [agni] came back [to the earth] with him( Indra who had been hidden) in this (mavasya) night. he (indra) is, verily, the good [god](visu-m.) among the gods, for he is a hero among them. then the gods said: "at home (ama )vetily, stays now the good [god] among us, who wenton journey [to fight with vrtra] for us".The indra's home, though not directly expressed, must be the earth, since his companionagni stays on earth in the amavasya night for the upavasatha of the new moon sacrifice.[on the offering of Samnayya (mixture of sour and fresh milk) to indra]…esd vai somo raia devanam annam yac candraimah. sa yatraisd etam ratrim md purdistanpascad ddrse tad imim loki agacchati. sd ihaivdpais causadhis cd praivisati. sa vai devanamvaisv. annami hy esam taid. yad esai etim ratrim ihamd vcisati tismad amavasya nama.This king Soma is, verily, food of the gods, when [he is] the moon. when this (king soma) assuch (the moon) is seen neither in the east nor in the west this whole night, then he comes to thisworld (cf. sx,1,4).he enters just here into waters and plants. he is, verily, the goods (vsnt.) of the gods, for he is food of the gods. from that this [king soma as the moon] stays thiswhole night here at home (cma), [this nightis ] amayyaby name.From the offering of Samnayya, equated with soma, the moon is bom anew3.,n.3). tdd enam adbhya oisadhibhyah smbhsrpyaihuibhyo dhi janayati. saf esa ahutibhyo jath pascad〓se.…then [oe] collects him(king soma as the moon) from waters, from plants,and makes him to be bomn from offerings [of the collected Soma]. Thus this (king soma asmoon) , bom from offerings, is seen in the westB) In the later part of this br, the sun's and the moon's motions are described respectivel
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesi oiuymieueiiostiosmoigsrisas Indra's and his rival vrtra's actions. The moon(vrtra) approaches the sunindra) fromafar andis devoured by him in the amavasya night. sucked out and thrown out by the sunthe moon appears again in the west and waxes to become his food:tid ui esa evendrah   esd taipaty. dithaisd evd vrtro yac candrcimuh. so syuisai bhrairyvyaicn-meva. taismad yy api puru viduram ipodito thainam etam ratrim upaipo myaplavate. so 〓svyuttam apdyate. t tim grasitvodeti.  s nd purcistan nd pascad ddrse. .〓 timnirchiya mirasyati. / sdi esd dhitih pascad ddrse. sa punar dpyayate. sai etdisyaivannddyaya puinaripyoyate.. 〓then, verily, this vety one is indra, this which heats (ie. the sun)on theother hand, this very one is vrtra, if [it conceinsyad) the moon. this (vrtra) as such (themoon) has just the nature as his (indra's) rival. for this reason, even though[vtrahe moon]was risen fotmerly iust far away [from inrahe sun], after that, [vrtra] foats iust near to him(Indra) this (amavasya) night. he (vrtra) attains to his (indra's) opened mouth. [indra] risesafter he has devoured himvrtra). He (vrtra) is seen neither in the east nor in the west. . after[Indra] has sucked out him, [indra] throws out him. Thus sucked out, this (vrtra) is seen in the〓est. he swells again. he swells again for in order to become) food of this very [indra].To be continued the calendar year, 5.the naksatras, 6. the beginning of the year, 7. Theseasons, 8. The shorter time unit,9. influences on the popular calendar).1)for astronomical instruments in ancient india, cf. ohash, development of the astronomicalobsetvation in vedic and post-vedic india, indian journal of history of Science 28(3),1993.185-251,esp.195-197.2)for this marniage, cf. kausitaki-br xv1(surya's father isSavitr or prajapati), aitreya-briv(prajapati).3)The main oblation of the new moonsacrifice might have been in origin soma, which was substituted by samnayya, then replaced bypurodasa.4)cf. zysk, medicine in the veda,19[rep.1996],12-17yciksma (consump-tion, tuberculosis).5)rt-(〓,.str.1) as " truth" or "wahrheit" tichy, konjunktiv143with anm.19,amano, Maitrayani samhita i-i,487with am.204of.) is difficult to accept.For gbruuadlk eid leisten, swear an oath〓, cf. hoffmann, aufsatze i292with anm.17.cp. the parallel kS ytaim amisva yitha .. s rtaim amit.6)the subi. vcisami in the yaitha-lause in the mS expresses what the cosmic order requires.7)the gods' food (soa asmoon) or nourishment in general circulates in the cosos as described in sbi4,:15.Xl1,1,4f., vi2,2,16,Xi6,2,-10,s. author, fs. narten, 200,248f, akten des 27.deutscherorientalistentages,1998[],15-162. For the circulation of vital energy in the cosmos, s.Author, studies in Religions East and west35,28[09],97-100in Japanese).<key words) astronomy, calendar, gtu, yta, naksatra, amavasya, soma, agnihotra, darsapurna-masau, indra, vrtra, rgveda, atharvaveda, Yajurveda-samnhita, satapatha-brahmana.(ret. associate professor, osaka city university; r. de seme cycle, universite de paris iii)
