The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesnagariuna's Influence on the formation ofthe Early yogacara Thoughts :From the mulamadhyamakakarika to the bodhisattvcbhumiSaoakira
Itis indeed true that the bodhisattvabhumi (bbh) has no direct reference to nagariuna's〓ulamadhyamakakariku k), however, when viewed from the contents of mK, theBbh shows significant traces in which we find the clear development of thoughts givenin the mk. amog those key concepts used in both texts are fattvd "truthfreality3,durgrhita-sunyata "wrongly grasped emptiness", prapanca " [verbal] proliferation"", vikalpa"conceptualization"" and so on. although a number of studies have so far been carried outon each text of both of the highest importance, a comparative approach to them is now adesideratum since the philosophical role that nagarjuna played in the history of bud-dhism and his influence on the formation of the early yogacara tenets still remain our fu-ture task. The present paper, therefore, aims at clarifying how the author of bbh elaboratedand developed the meanings of the above-mentioned key concepts.〓1.tattya truthfrealityFor nagariuna, tatta "truthfreality" is undoubtedly one of the key terms, especially inrelation to the budcha's teaching. except both usages of tattva in the sense of "in realitytattvatah)"(Mk17,23.2)and eidentity [and difference]"(tatra[-amyatua])(22.8))there appear the following four verses containing the term tattvain the mk:Mk:15.6svabhavcm parabhavam bhauam cubhovcm eye pasyanti napsyanti te tattyam buddhasasane/"Those who see own-nature, other-nature, existence and non-existence do notsee the truth of the buddha's teaching."18.9aparapratyayam santcmprapancair apropancitam/mippikoipcm cnonartham ett tatnyasy laksancm/1"not dependent on anything other than itself, quiescent, not proliferated byverbal proliferations, beyond conceptualization, undifferentiated, these are the
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesNagariuna's Influence on the formation ofthe early yogacara thoughts (a. sarto)(9、characteristics ofreality."24.9ye 'nayor ma vijananti vibhugam styaor dvayoh/e tattuam ma vijamanti lgambhire buddhasasanel/(1See saito[18pp.843-845)" Those who do not know the distinction between the two truths do not knowthe true nature of the profound buddha's teaching."26.10samsaramulam smskoran avidon smskaropy atah/avidan karakas tasman ma vidvams tattyadarsanat/"Thus the ignorant constructs the conditioned things which form the basis oftransmigration. Therefore, the ignorant is the doer while the wise is not [thedoer] because he sees the reality."As may be understood in the above usage, what Nagarjuna means by the term tattvain theMK is the truth or true nature of the buddha's teaching, which coiresponds to paramcrthg,"the ultimate reality".viewed from this angle, the bbh appears to have elaborated the meaning of the veryconcept tattua. of those eighteen chapters composing the bbh, the fourth entitled tattvarthathe meaning of tattvd" deals specifically with this topic. in the beginning of this chapter,the bbh classifies the term tattvain short into the following two meanings1)yathovadbhavikata "existence as it really is", i.e., dharmanam bhutato the realityof dharmas"
2) yavadbhavikata "existence as much as possible"", i.e., dharmanam srpata "thetotality of dharmas".It should be noted that, traditionally speaking, these two categories of dharmas, bhutata"reality" and sarvata totality", correspond respectively to dharmata "the nature of dhar-mas"(法性)and the entirety of all dharmas(一切法).dividing tottva into two categoriesas above may reflect the sarvastivada's influence, on the one hand, and represent a prelimi-nary stage for forming the Yogacara theory of " three natures"" (trisvabhava), on the other2.sngrhita-sunyata rightly grasped emptiness"" vs. durgrhita-sunyata "wronglygrasped emptiness"It appears also common to both authors of mk and bbh that they tried to differentiatesugrhita-sunyata erightly grasped emptiness" from durgrhita-sunyata "wrongly graspec
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesnagarjuna's influence on the Formation ofthe early yogacara thoughts . saio)emptiness" i a slightly but significantly different sense. after setting out the three versesdealing with the two-truths in the mk28-10,nagarjuna refers to a slow-witted personwho wrongly sees emptiness as follows:Mk:2.vinasayati durdrstu sumyata mandomedhascm/sarpo yatha durgrhito vidyav dusprcsadhita"Emptiness, having been wrongly seen, destroys the slow-witted. it is like awrongly grasped snake or a wrongly executed incantation."For nagarjuna, one who wrongly sees emptiness means a person who regards emptiness asnon-existence and do not understand the two truths based on which the various Buddhasgive their teaching.〓n the other hand, for the author of bbh, one who wtongly sees emptiness means aperson who regards as empty and non-existent not only that of which something is emptybut also the "something" itself. Therefore, the author explains both sugrhiyatu anddurgrhita-sunyata as follows.bbh. yah kuscit sramano va brahmano va tacca mecchati yena sunyam td api necchatyat tena sumycm iyom evamrupa durgrhita sunyatety ucyate/srvabhavacc kutraki keng sunvum bhavisyotilf…yatas c yd yatra n bhavati tat tena sunyam iti samanupcsyati/ yt punaratrovasistam bhavati tat sad ihustiti yathabhutam prajanatil iyam ucyate sunyata-vakrantir yathabhuta aviparita ..iyam ucyate sugrhita sunyata smyakprajnayasupratividchetil/ (pp.101-102)" somebody, sramana or brahmana, does not accept not only that (b) of which some-thing (a)is empty but also the "something" (a)which is empty of that (b).empti-ness [understood like this is called 'wrongly grasped" durgrhita). Since nothingexists, how and what will be empty of anything?he sees that this (a) is empty of that(b) because that (b) does not exist in this(a);however, he understands as it really is that what (c) remains in this (a) alsoexists. This is called an insight into emptiness as it really is and withoutcontrariety... this emptiness is called "rightly grasped"(sugrhita), i.e., rightlydiscerned with right knowledge."
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesNagariuna's influence on the formation of the early yogacara thoughts (a. saito)(943.vyavahara verbalusage"" and abhilapa  verbal expression'as is well-known, for nagariuna, vyavahora, cotresponding to samvrti "verbal custom",plays an important role in enabling a practitioner to attain the ultimate reality (paramartha).The following verse typically represents this religio-philosophical scheme of nagarjuna's:Mk:2.wravahoram aasritya paramartho ha desyatefparamartham anagamya nirvanam nadhigamyatef"without depending upon verbal usage, the ultimate reality is not taught.without attaining the ultimate reality, Nirvana is not accomplished."The author of bbh also acknowledges the indispensable role of verbal expression abhilapa),while stressing specifically the ineffable nature of all dharmas as follows:bbh: evam nirabhilapyasvabhovesu sarvadharmesu kasmad abhilapah prayujpatel tathahi vinabhilopena sa mirabhilapyadharmata paresm vaktum api na sakyate srotumapil/ vacame sravane casati sa mirabhilopyasvabhovata inatum apina sakyate/ tasmadabhilopah prayujyate sravanainanayal p.106)"thus, since all dharmas have the nature ofineffability, why is verbal expression ap-plied at all? That is because, without verbal expression, the ineffable nature cannotbe told to others, nor heard by others. if it is neither spoken nor heard, then thenature of ineffability cannot be known. Therefore, verbal expression is applied for[producing] knowledge through hearing."Despite the difference of adopted terms, an indispensable tole of words is common to boththe mk and the bbh in order to attain the ultimate reality and the ineffable nature of alldharmas tespectively.4. vikapa conceptualization" andprapanca" [verbal] proliferation"For nagarjuna, the root of defilements (klesa) is conceptualization (vikaipa) whichitself is again rooted in verbal proliferation (prapanca) as is typically expressed in thefollowing stanza:Mk:18.karmaklesaksayan moksah karmaklesa vikupatahte prapancat prapancas tu sunyatoyam nirudhyutef"liberation is [ attained] from the destruction of actions and defilements.Actions and deflements arise from conceptualizations. These are from verbalproliferation. but verbal proliferationis extinguishedin emptiness."
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies100)nagarjuna's influence on the Formation of the early yogacara Thoughts a. sato)According to candrakinrti's understanding〓 , this verse represents the purpose for the teach-ing ofemptiness unyatoyamprayojamam, mK2.7).and as mentioned above, "not prolifer-ated by verbal proliferations" (prapancair aprapancitam) is defined by nagarjuna as one ofthe five characteristics of tatva or "reality".〓nthe other hand, the author of bbh classified the meaning of vikalpainto eight types,i.e., " conceptualization of own-nature"" (svabhova-vikaipa), "conceptualization of particular-ity"(visesa-vikalpa), "conceptualization of a group" pindagraha-vikapa), "conceptualiza-tion of i"(ahom iti vikalpah), "conceptualization of "mine""(maneti vikalpah), "conceptu-alization of the agreeable"" priya-vikolpa), "conceptualization of the disagreeable" pripa-vikalpa), and "conceptualization of what is contrary to both these"" (tadubhayaviparita-vikalpa)". the relationship between vikalpa and prapanca is also referred to in relation tcthe first three-fold conceptualization as follows:Bbh sa punar aym astavidho vikatpah katamesam trayanom vastunamn janako bhavatiff〓sc svabhovavikatpo ys c vesesavikalpo yas ca pindagrahavikatpa itimne trayovikatpd vikatpaprapancudhisthanam vikalpaprapanculambanam vastu janayantirupadisaminakamf yad vstv adhisthaya s ramasaminabhilapoparigrhito nama-saminabhilapaparibhavito vikalpah prapancayn tasminn ev vstuni vicaratyanekavidho bahunanaprakorahf p.107)"further. what three bases vastu) does the eight-fold conceptualization create ?"conceptualization of own-nature, conceptualization of particularity, and conceptu-alization of grasping a group', this three-fold conceptualization creates the basecalled 'form' and so on, i.e., the base which serves as the foundation of conceptualproliferation and the obiective-basis of conceptual proliferation. with that base as itsfoundation. the conceptualization of many kinds and various species -enveloped innames, appellations, and verbal expression and saturated with names, appellationsmnd verbal expressioproliferates and ranges on the very base."Conclusion
From the above investigation, the following conclusions may probably be drawn: first.the concept of "ttruth/reality" tattva), which corresponds to the ultimate reality (paramartha)and emptiness (sumyata) in the MK, was further developed by the author of Bbh in whichthe term was used to denote both the reality and totality of dharmas. Secondly, although
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesNagariuna's influence on the Formation of the early yogacara Thoughts (a. saito)(101the topic how to rightly see emptiness was common to both authors, the author of bbhdiffers from nagariuna specifically in his accepting as existent that which is empty ofsomething or some nature. thirdly, regarding the ultimate reality paramartha ) or the natuireof dharmas dharmata) as ineffable, they equally acknowledge an indispensable role ofwords in enabling a practitioner to attain the ultimate reality, i.e., nirvana. Fourthly, whileNagarjuna takes prapanca or verbal proliferation" as the root cause of all defilements, theauthor of bbh rather regards vikapa or "conceptualization" as the root cause of defilements.In the bbh, prapanca was used to refer to a common aspect or motion of vikalpa, ie.,"proliferation". lastly, in sum, although most of the key terms as dealt with in this paperwere already used in the mk, it was thereafter in the bbh, especiallyichapterentitledtattvartha "the meaning of tattva"" that they were fully analyzed, elaborated and developedwith a slight but significant modification.Notes.
1)as far as our present knowledge goes, the first reference to the stanza of Mk in the Yogacaraworks is practically given by asanga in his xi-yng-sheng-jico-n(顕揚聖教論)as follows:今此論中顯薄伽梵所説何法。頌曰。諸佛説妙法正依於二諦一者名世俗者名嚴義(〓Mk28)(taisho, vol.31,503a7-10).cf. hayashima [20pp.202-203.2)see saito [7].3)hereafter, unless specifically mentioned, de Jong [1977]and takahashi []are used asthe texts of mk and bbh (chaptet 4) respectively.4)see macdonald [07]p5)tattvarthah katamah/ samasato dvividhahf yathavadbhavikatamc dharmanam arabhya yabhutata/ yavadbharikatum curabhya y dhcrmanam srvatu  iti bhutata suruatac dharmanamsamastas tattvartho veditvytakahashi []p.85).6)see la vallee poussin [1903-1913]pp.490-491; saito [1998]pp.29-30.References
de jong, j. w. [1977]:nagarjuna htulamadhyamakakurikah, madras: the adyar library andResearch centre.La vallee poussin, l. de [1903-191mulamadhyamakakarikuis dhyamikasutras) denagarjiuna, avecprasannapad commentaire de candrakirti, bibliotheca buddhica iv.s.-petersbourg.Macdonald, a. [007] "Revisiting the mulamadhyamakakarika: text-critical proposals andproblems", stndies inindichilosophy ad buddhismp.25-55.Hayashima, o. [2"ken-y-sho-gyo-ron ni okeru Sansho-setsu kanken"" (on trisvabhau
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies02)nagarjuna's influence on the Formation ofthe early Yogacara Thoughts (a. saito)theory in the ken-y-ho-gyo-ron), indo no bunkato romri indficcuiture ad logic, vol-umeinhonourofprof. h. tosakion his seventieth birthday),pp.199-221Saito, a. [1985] "Textcritical Remarks on the mulamadhyamakakuriko as cited in the prsnnapdd", iournal ofindicmad buddhisf studies 33-2,pp.842-846"-[1998]"ku to kotoba-churon dai4 Sho, dai7Geno kaishaku o megutte" (Emptinessand words: on the different interpretations of the mulamadhyamakakarika.7),journalofreligiouis studties 31, pp.27-52.-07]"is nagarjuna a madhyamika?",hokekyoo daiiokyyoten no kenkyi tudies in thesaddharmapundarikasitra and mahayana scriptures),pp.153-164Takahashi, k. [20]bsatsuji shinifsugi-bon kara shokecchaku-bun-chu-bosatsuii eno shiso.tenkai (philosophicl developments ffom the bodhisattvabhumi to the bodhisattvabhumivinis-〓aya), tokyo: sankibo press.(This research is supported in part by a grant-in-aid for scientific research (a from jSps)(Key words) nagarjuna, mulamadhyamakakarika, bodhisattuabhumi, tattua, vikalpa, prapanca(Professor, The university of Tokyo, ph.d.)新刊紹介
財団法人仏教伝道協会英訳大蔵経翻訳叢書THSUTRa
THCENTRao
SITTING MEDIIo(坐禪三味經)
Translatedby yaMAbeNobuyoshi & SUKIFumihikoB5変形判定価3,675円(税込)
