The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe vyaghri-jataka known to sri lankan buddhistsand its Relation to the northern buddhist VersionsMatSuMura Junko1.Introduction〓n the wall ofa rock cave at aluvihara temple in matale, srilanka, among other iatukastories and famous paintings describing tortures in hells, several painted stories of bodhi-sattva, or jutakas, are found, of which no pali version is known. one of them is the wellknown story of bodhisattva's body-sacrifice to a hungry tigress. The story is, however, notincluded in the canonical pali jataka collection, in which is found only a totally differentstory of the same name, the vyagghaiataka Ja no.272),where bodhisattva is a tree god.But the story which the people on this Theravada buddhist island know by the name"vyaggha-jataka', or 〓vyaghri-jataka", is not the one in the pali jataka collection, but exactlythe sane story which is well--known and wide-spread among northern (or mahayana) bud-dhists. This fact is the starting point of the present author's research for this article: howthis story came to be known in sri lanka. The facts of the research may reveal some of thehistorical intercourse between Southern and northern buddhism, upon which, so far notmuch research has been pursued. besides this, the story's version knownon the island isnot the sole one。 but. as we discuss later. there seem to be several versions to be related todefinite versions found in the northern buddhist texts.2.versions ofthe tigress storythe bodhisattva body-sacrifice to a hungry tigress story (hereafter called the tigress story',orin Skt., "vyaghri-jataka', as inryasura's jatakunaid) is related in several northern buddhisttexts. The most well-known version may be the one in the suyarn )bhos-sutra or thesuparnaprabhosottamasutra). For this sutra. there exist the sanskrit text, the three translationsin the chinese tripitaka, and the translations in tibetan, mongolian, khotanese, and uighurlanguages. however, itis beyond the scope of this article to examine and compare all these
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudieshe vvaghri-jataka known to sn lankan buddhists and its relation to the northern buddhist versions (J.msuMURa)exts. inconnection with the present article's theme, therefore, only the chinese translationswill be treated.In the xiam-yu-jing賢愚經,the so-called sutra of the wise and the foolish, anotherfamous version of the story is found. The main story of these two texts is essentially thesame. however, the number of cubs to which the tigress gave birth differ, namely seven irthe fotmer and two in the latter. for the study of tigress story versions only these two havebeen attractitg much interest. The number of cubs has been the most decisive characteris-tic, especially for art-historians, to identify the story's painted versions.beside those two texts. there are several other versions of the story which are dividedroughly into two groups: texts in which bodhisattva was prince Mahasattva, and texts inwhich bodhisattva was a brahman ascetic. in the following sections i will list the texts ofthese two groups with brief accounts of theit contents.3.versions in which bodhisattva was prince mahasattva(摩詞薩〓3.1.The snvarn (pra)bhos-tra(金光明經tr.by dharmaksema(曇無護)385-433c.e.,〓1no.663,3522-35c21;合部金光明經,a revised version of the former, conpleted in597. e, t16o.〓64,39c2-39921,金光明最勝王經,a new translation by yi-jing(義淨)completed i.e., t16no.〓5,422-442.Bodhisattva was prince Mahasattva(摩薩〓),the youngest of three sons of king maharatha,the eldest being prince mahapranada (or mahabala), and the second, prince mahadeva.1 he sawa starving tigress with seven cubs and, out of compassion, he laid his body in front of the tigress.but, because of his power of loving-kindness, the tigress did not dare to eat him. so, having piercechis neck with a bamboo spike, he jumped down from a high mountain and lay deadin front of her.The tigress and her seven cubs could then eat his body and their lives were saved3.2.The xian-y-jing賢愚經,or the sutra of the wise and the foolishcompiled by hui-jiao(慧覺)and others, based upon stories heard in the country of Gao-chang(高昌,turpan, ortradi-tionally called turfan), 5th century, T o.202,352b19-353b6)The plot of the main story isvery similar to the one in the suvari (ra) bhoscsutrg. the only difference is that princeMahasattva's father is maharatna, not maharatha, and the number of cubs is two. it alsohas a typical jotaka story structure, namely, a story taking place in the present (paccupamna-vatthu) and concludes with explanation of the connection of the characters in the main storywith those in the present day story smodhana)
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesThe vyaghri-Jataka knownto sri lankan buddhists and its Relation to the northern buddhist versions (J. MAsuMURA)3.3.the fo-shuo-pi-sa-ben-xing-/jing(佛説菩薩本行經,4th-5th century c. e., translator unknowiT3 no.155.119a28-29)摩副薩〓太子時.爲餓虎故放捨身命.when bodhisattva was prince Mahasattva. he sacrificedhis life for a hungry tiger (or tigress). There is no mentionof the cubs3.4.the pu-s-ben-sheng-mnan-un(菩薩本生鬘論,4) late loth century to the early 1lth centuryc.e., T3no.160,332b23-333b9):Except for a slight difference of the introductory narrationthe content is apparently adopted from the suvarn (pra)bhasasutra.3.5.the fo-shuo-yao-xing-she-shen-jing(佛説要行捨身經,tang dynasty, translator unknownprobably acompilation madein china, t85no.2895,141b6-7)having understood the truth of sunyato, prince mahasattva offered his body to a hungry tigress andhef sevencubs.4. versions in which bodhisattva wasa brahmaascetic〓1aryasura's jatakamaia or the bodhisattvayadanamala th～oth century c. e.. ed. hkern,1-6):
bodhisattva was born in a rich brahman family and became an ascetic. when he was wandering ira forest accompanied by his disciple, ajita, he saw a tigress that was about to devour her cubs ouof intense hungef (number of cubs unstated).after having sent aiita to look for food for thetigress, he threw himself in front of the tigress42.the divyavadong (ed. p. l. vaidya, 310,29.312,20)bodhisattva was born in a rich brahman family and was named brahmaprabha. he became anascetic. when he and his two fellow ascetics saw a hungry tigress with two cubs, he gave his bodyo the tigress to prevent her from eating her cubs.〓3the li-u-j-jing(六度集經,translated by kan seng-hui(康僧会,?～28c.e.),t3 .152〓b8-26)
when bodhisattva was practicing austerities on a mountain, he saw a hungry tigress nursing hercubs. bodhisattva threw his body head-first into the mouth of the tigress. (number of cubs unstated).4.4. ksemendra's bodhisattyavadanakatpaluta no.51(Rukmavatyavadana, ed. vaidya, i〓16-319
Bodhisattva was first born as a woman namned Rukmavati. she cut her breasts off and gave them toa poor starving woman as food, and through the satyavacana done in front of god sakra she wastransformed into a man and became king sattvavara. then, in his next life, he was reborn as a
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studieshe vvaghri-Jataka knownto sr lankan buddhists and its Relation to the northemn buddhist versions J. masumRa)brahmin named satyavrata and became an ascetic. when he saw a tigress, who had given birth towo cubs, about to eat them out of hunger, he gave his body as food to the tigress5.The tigress story of the fo-shuo-p--fon-shen-i」--h-qi-t-yn-yuan-iing(佛説菩薩投身[飴]餓虎起塔因縁經)In addition to the tigress story versions discussed above, there exists a very interestingand unicue, in which bodhisattva was a prince called candanamati and later became anascetic. The textis extant only in chinese translation, but it is almost surely translated fronra Sanskrit original, giving us a close look at a probable relationship with the gandharareg1on.
This text's name is the fo-shuo-pu-s-tou-shen-y-e-hu-qi-t-y-yuam-jing(佛説菩薩投身飴餓虎起塔因縁經,t3 no.172,424b5-428a12).according to the colophon, this text wastranslated by a monk, Fa-sheng, from turfan in northemn liang(北涼高昌國沙門法盛譯).so itmay be assignedto ca.4.e.a surnmary of the story is as follows:buddha once went to the kingdomof gandhara(乾陀越國)and there he relatedthe following storyNine kalpcs ago, bodhisattva was born as crowprince zhan-tan-mo-ti(梅檀摩提,*candana-nati) of a great kingdom called gan-tuo-mo-ti(乾陀摩提;*Gandhamati). his father, the king,was Gan-tuo-shi-li(乾陀戸利,*Gandhasril ), and his mother, the queen, was cha-mo-mu-qu(差摩目法;*ksemamegha?).the crownprince was fond of practicing charity, but, fearing to put hisfamily into destitution by using up all the riches of the royal house, he secretly went to anotherkingdom called pei-ti-she(斐提舍,*vidisa), where he sold himself as a slave to a brahman forone thousand pieces of gold. These he then gave as alms to the poor. while he was collecting fire-wood on a mountain, he found a great amount of gosirsacandana (the best candand wood, said tocure all diseases), with which he then cured the king who suffered from leprosy. The king of pei-ti-he (vidisa) was very pleased, and after freeing the prince from slavery, sent him back to his na-tive kingdom,however, the prince again left the palace and went deepinto the mountains to joina group of ascetics.one day, he saw atigress with seven cubs, freezing in the snow at the bottom of a deep gorge. hetold his teacher and five hundred fellow ascetics that he wanted to sacrifice his body to save thetigress and her cubs. although his teacher tried to stop him, saying that he was still young and hadmuch to learn, the prince replied that, in the distant past, he had made a vow to give his body athousand times and had already done so nine hundred ninety-nine times in his former lives. this.then, was the final occasion to fulfill his vow. he climbed up to the top of a high precipice, threwhimself off, and landed dead in front of the tigress. his parents, the kind and queen, built a stupothere containing the prince's bones.atthe end ofthe story, the relationship of the characters in the past time to those in the
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studiesThe vyaghri-jataka known to sr lankan buddhists andits Relation to the northem buddhist versions (j. matsuMura)present time is revealed, and the teacher in the group of ascetics is identified withbodhisattva maitreya. This is a noteworthy characteristic in connection with one of the srilankan versions to be discussed below. This chinese text also reports that the dan andxiang editions(丹郷本)have a sequel: the king (in the time of buddha) built a greatstup at the place, and it exists even to this day. at the east side of the stupa, there is atemple compound and five thousand monks venerate the stupa continually. fa-sheng(法盛,the translator of the text) himself saw that people from various countries who have anllness like leprosy or other diseases with no known cures always come to this stupa to payhomage, and they are all cured.3)The content of this textis, as seen above, very unique among the many versions of thetigress story. that Fa-sheng(法盛)seems to have visited the place and probably obtainedthe original Sanskrit text there, and also the fact that the name. gandhara, is mentioned inthe text itself, gives proof that this version may have been the most popular onein sth centuryGandhara. in addition, the text is endowed with features of masterly prose compositionwith a smooth narration vivid and sometimes even with humor. The present author wouldlike to give only one example here: when the crown prince runs away to another kingdomto sell himself, the queen, the mother, becomnes half-crazed and reproaches the king"夫人罵:『由王樫貪,護惜錢財,不愛念子.今寧可以錢財為子身不?』王曰:『吾失在先,今悔何及?且其還宮,保不失子.今悔何及?且共還宮,保不失子."(t3 no.172〓259-11)
The queen curses the king saying, "lt is because yout are stingy, grudging money and don't reallylove your son. now what are you going to do for your son's life with the money?" the kinganswered:〓what's done is done. what use for regret? Now let's go back to the palace. i wilcertainly protect my son.'although in this case, the cause of argument is rather serious, the conversation is aquarrel that might be heard between any husband and wife.).The vyaghpyayadonain the bodhisattvavadonakappulanaIn addition to the version discussed above there is another unique version found in thebodhisattvavadonakalpalata, no.9vyaghryavadana (ed. vaidya, vol.2,pp.537-538)inwhich bodhisattva was prince karunarekha,4) not prince Mahasattva. in this versionemnphasis is put on the stoty of the present time (paccupannavatthu ), and, what is noteworthy,is that this story is more detailed than the one in the introduction of the samne stoty in the
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieshe vvaghmi-jataka knownto sri lankan buddhists andits Relation to the Northern buddhist versions (j. masuura)〓i-j-jing or the sutra of the wise amd the foolish (above3.2.). however, the main stor.that it accompanies is totally different, bodhisattva was a prince namned karunarekha,who gave his body to a tigress in order to prevent her from devouring her own two cubsout of intense hunger.lt is interesting that the bodhisattvavaddnakalpalato includes two totally differentversions of the tigress story (cf.4.4.7.the Tigress Stories transmitted in Sri lanka and their relation toNorthern versionsThe paintings at aluvihara temple are apparently not of very old origin. but this factdoes not mean that these jataka stories were only recently introduced to sri lanka. thepainting of the tigress story shows surprising correspondence with the version in the divya-vadana discussed above(4.2.). because there are depicted two fellow ascetics of bodhisattvaand two cubs of the tigress. There is also concrete evidence in a-xian's travel record toIndia and Sri lanka, the gao-sen-izhucm(高僧法顯傳t5lno.2085),that northernor mahayanistic jataka stories were known to Sinhalese buddhists in the sth century c.e.Fa-xian stayed at abhayagirivihara in anuradhapura for about two years (ca.41.e.),and during his stay he witnessed the tooth relic festival. In his description of the festivalwe find the following passage:佛齒常以三月中出之.未出前十日,王莊校大象,使一辯説人著王衣服騎象上撃鼓唱言菩薩從三阿僧祇劫作行不惜身命.以國城妻子及挑眼與人割肉貿截頭布施投身餓虎不悋髓腦.如是種種苦行爲衆生故成佛.(T5lno.2085,86a20-25)Here, not only the tigress stoty but also the story of cutting off one's flesh to save thelife of a dove ( the Mahayana version of the sibi-jataka) and the story of cutting off the head togive it as alns (the king candraprabha jataka, for which the pali textis so far unknown) are men-tioned. also, the period of bodhisattva's past lives to fulfill all paramitus to becomne a bud-dha is here said to be three asankhyeya-kalpas, a period commonly said in most mahayanaBuddhist literature, while in the theravada tradition it is usually said to be four asarkhyeyasand a hundred of thousand kalpas.actually, on his way to india, Fa-xian visited the place where bodhisattva sacrificedhis body to save a tigress:自此東行七日.有國名竺刹戸羅.竺刹戸羅漢言截頭也.佛爲菩薩時,於此處以頭施人.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies故因以爲名.復東行二日至投身僂餓虎處.此二處亦起大塔.皆衆寶校飾.諸國王臣民競興供養.散華然燈相繼不絶.通上一塔彼方人亦名爲四大塔也.(T5lno.208858bo-11)as discussed above, Fa-sheng(法盛)also visited the same place only about 20yearslater than fa-xian(法顯)。〓Therefore, the story that Fa-xian knew may be most probablythe same version of the pou-shen e-h qi-ta fing苦薩投身飯餓虎經,or the fo-shuo pu- tou-shen yie- qi-ym jing佛説菩薩投身飴餓虎起塔因縁經(Tno.172)translated into chinese by fa-sheng, and not the famous version in the suvarna (pra)bhoissutrc, this is because in the i no172version. the stup containing bodhisattva'sboiies was built at the place where bodhisattva sacrificed his body, and at the time of Fa-xian and Fa-sheng, people believed the stupa near taxila (probably at mardan) was that one,while in the suyarn (pra)bhasaisutra version, buddha relates the story at the request ofthe bodhi tree under which he attained enlightenment. The stupa appears from the eartlwhen buddha starts the sermon and it disappears at its end. about 20years later, whenXuan-zang(玄奘)visited the saie place, there was still that same stupa, but the cloisterwas almost deserted. This may be the reason why xuan-zang connected the place with theSuvarna (pra) bhasasuitra version of the story.In sri lanka, another painting of the tigress story is found on the outside wall of animage house at Ruvanvalisaya inanuradhapura. in this painting, however, there aredepicted neither the two brothers nor the cubs. we may say that this painting correspondsto the version in the Fo-shuo-p-s-ben-xing-/ig (above 3.3.)Finally. there is a written text of the tigress stoty in sri lanka: a wesleyan missionary,robert spence hardy, reported the stoiy in his mamualof buddhism publishedin853e The next birth received by bodhisat was as a brahmnan, in the village of daliddi, atd on accountof the great beauty of his person he was called brahma. as sixteen years of age he had read thethree vedas, iriu, yaiu, and sama, and was acquainted with all the sciences. near the rock of eraka,but then called munda. he became a ascetic, and had500 followers, of whom the bodhisat whowill one day become maitri budha was the chief. one day, when this() disciple and brahmna werewandering about the forest to gather fruits for their sustenance, they saw near the rock atigress thathad some time before brought forth, and was then suffering from hunger. brahma, on seeing this,reflected again on the evils of existence, and sent his disciple if he could find any bones of offal thatthey could give to the tigress to appease its hunger. during his absence, brahmna remembered thatitwas onlyby the birth ofa budha that these evils could be removed, and calling to mind that tesolu-tion he had previously formed, he refiected that in order to the attainment of this great object it
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studieswould be necessary for him to give in alms, many times, his own heads, eyes, wives, and childrenThen exclaiming, "May iby this become a budha" he placed himself in the way ofthe tigress, thatby giving his flesh he might preserve its life and that of its little ones. when the animal perceivedhim, it bounded from the rock to the place where he stood, seized him, and tore him in pieces.bhe power of the merit arising from this act he was born in a deva-loka.'This story is, according to its author, based upon the saddharmaratnakaraya, the l5thcentury sinhalese work written by dharmadinna vimalakirti. In this story we can see theresemblance to the jatakamala version, in which bodhisattva wandered in the forestaccompanied by only one disciple, ajita. but it also shows resemblance with the tno.172version, in which bodhisattva joined the group of500ascetics and their leader is identifiedwith the future buddha Maitreya. however, this version is also different from the twcpainted story versions that the present author sawin sri lanka.8. conclusionAs we have seen above, we know still very little about the actual Theravada buddhisttradition. although it is generally believed that Mahayana buddhism was denied and allMahayana scriptures were destroyed by religious reform undertaken by king parakramabahu the great in the 12th century in Sri lanka, some of the notthern or mahayana tradi-tions once introducedon the island have been transmitted in various ways. it is very impor.tant to search for those elements both in art and in texts in order to understand the reality ofSinhalese buddhism, or even to understand how the literal tradition was transmitted oveicenturies. to discover these elements, it is important, on the one hand, to investigate thegreat mine of sinhalese medieval (11th-15th centuries) buddhist literature as well as thepost-canonical pali literature of the same period, since in that age the sinhalese buddhis+scholar-monks were very active and produced many works. it is in these that the oldtraditions of the island still alive at that times. on the other hand, also important, as thepresent author has shown by example, is a more detailed study of the texts belonging to theNorthern tradition, especially the texts only surviving in chinese translations along withthe study of pali or southern buddhist texts. Needless to say, to get the complete picture ofSinhalese buddhism we must go back into history, into its art and literature, a huge task forwhich the concentrated collaboration of scholars in the allied fields of archeology, art historyand linguistics is to be greatly intensified and deepened.
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies1)T6no.663352-3564397a6-399c21,no.66452-4545.For the Skttext, see nobel, johannes (1937),suparnaprabhasottamnasufra, dcs goldgz-sutra: inSanskrittext des uhoyar-budlthismus hch dndschriften d mif hilte der fibetischerubersetzungeeipzig: otto harrassowitz),pp.201-2402)For this chinese textadvocated as a translation of aryasura's Jjatakamala, see the famous article by brough, johr(1964),"the chinese pseudo-translation of aryasura's Jatakamala," a major, new series 〓i. ,pp.27-5ara minoru and wright, j.c.(1996)ed., collectedcperslondon school oforiental and african studies), pp.217-2433)The abridged version is found in thechinese jing--yi-xiang(經律異相t53no.212,compiled by bao-chang(寶唱)and othermonks in6c. . the tigress story is found in scroll13,162c2in which bodhisattva wasCrown prince of the kingdom of Gan-tuo-shi-li(乾陀戸利,*Gandhasti?), and it is stated that thestory is taken from the p- tou-shen fe-u qi-ta jing(菩薩投身飯餓虎經),which obviouslyindicates the fo-shuo pu-sa tou-shen yi-h qi-yin-ycn jing(佛説菩薩投身飴餓虎起塔因縁經).however, the jing-li-yi-xiang adopts only the latter part of the original text corresponding to t3〓23-4271,i.e. the stoty of the prince's sacrifice of his body to the tigress.4)accordingto the recent research made by okano kiyoshi, the prince's name is karunarenu. see okano, kiyoshi(岡野潔)(2009),"avadanakalpalata chap.997and SMRaM chap.23edition and japaneseTranslation of Yasomitra, Vyaghri, hastin and kacchapa stories"avadanakalpalata94-97章とSMRAM23章-yasomitra, vyaghri, hastin, kacchapaの校訂・和訳-),soutssicalstudies(南アジア古典学),no.4,pp-177.5)cf. legge, james(886),arecordobudchhistic kingdoms beingccount by the chinese mk f-hienof his travels iintia adCey3 search of the buddhist books of discipline, translated and annotatedwith a corean recension of the chinese text (oxford: clarendon press, reprint, new york: paragonBook reprint co.,1965),p.105.6)cf. legge, opcit., p. 32.here legge also mentionsthe tigress stoty in spence llardy's book in fn. 2. cf. fn.10below.7)as for fa-sheng"sbiography and his travel account to india and sri lanka, see ochiai, toshinori(落合俊典)(2001)."shaku hoio sen Rekkokuden oboegaki [notes on fa-shen's li go chum"(釈法盛撰『歴〓伝』覚書),fs. prof. ishigami zeno(石上善應教授古稀記念論集),tokyo sankibo busshorin,vol. 2, pp.2943.8)hardy, robert spence(1853),a mcmuclofbddhismin its moderndevelopmentlondon. partridge & oakey; repr. chowkhamba sanskrit studies vol. Lvi, varanasi,1967),pp.91f. cf. von hinuber, oskar(1998),entsfehung und aufbcu der jjataka-sammlung.Studienliteratur des Theravad-buddhismus iStuttugart: franzsteiner, 1998), pp.114 andfns.34and344.(The research for this article was supported by the grant-in-aid for scientific research(b) no21320015 from jSPs)(key words) vyaghrijataka(投身餓虎),sri lanka, gandhara, Fa-xien(法顕),fa-sheng(法盛)(professor, international college for postgraduate buddhist Studies, ph.d)
