The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies6)journalofinctiam and buddhist studies vol.58.no.3. march20on the First chapter of the dbu ma theg mchogby taranatha
MochizukI kaieIntroduction
Taranatha kun dga' snying po(1575-1635), who is well known as an tibetan author ofthe history of indian buddhism,1' is one of the great masters in the jo nang pa school.2)Though he is said to have developed the teaching of the great Madhyamaka (dbu ma cher0 or other-emptiness (gzhan stong) of dolpo pa Shes rab rgyal mtshan1292-1361),itisnot clear how he analyses this teaching in his works. here i consider one of his small textsi order to throw lighton the tradition of the great Madhyamaka in the jo nang pa school.In the collected works4) of taranatha we can find many tantric commentaries, but thereare only seven small texts in which titles the term "the great Madhyamaka" or " other-emp-iness" is included.) one of them is the Theg mchog shin tu rs pa'i dbu ma chen po〓ampar nges bu ma theg mchog),9 which has eight chapters and is written in verseThe theme of each chapter is.1.recognition of the nature of the middle (dbu ma'i rang bzhin ngos bzung ba)2.the definition of all objects of knowledge in general (shes bya'i yul thams cd spyldog nas gtmla dbabpa)3.the definition of buddha nature and the realmof dharmas (sags rgys kyi snyingpochos kyi dbyings gtnla dban pa)4.The definition of accomplishment of eight consciousnesses (ram shes ishogs brg-〓d sgrubpa gtc dab pa)5.the definition of the five dharmas, the three characters and dependent origination(chos lnga dang rang bzhin gsum dung rten'brel gtanla dbpa)6. The definition oftwofold selflessness (bdag med gnyis gton la db pa)7.The definition of the two truths (benp gnyis gtla dbabpa)8.The definition of path and result lam domg 'bras bu gm la dbb paFrom these titles we can guess that the author is influenced also by the teachings of the
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesOn the First chapter of the dbu ma theg mchog by taranatha (k. mochizukI)Yogacara, This attitude is the same as that of dol po pa, who confuses the Madhyamikateaching with that of the Yogacara or tathagatagarbha theory in the name of the greatMadhyamaka. Further as he refers to the theory of the basis, path and result explained inthe ri chos nges onr'a mtsho of dol po pa, it is clear that the author depends on him towrite this text. we can find a commentary on the dbu ma theg mchog by his disciple, yeshes rgya mtsho (117 cent.), the theg mchog shintu rgys p'i dbu ma cheno rnampor nges pd'i rnam bshadzn bris dbuphyogs legs pa, and it is also compiled into the col-lected works of taranatha.7The first chapter〓' is written in twenty-eight verses. according to Ye shes rgya mtsho,the contents of the first chapter are classified like this:0[dedicated verse.1Introduction1.1expressions of worship1.1.1object of worship9[v.1]1.1.2place to be worshipped [v.2]1.1.3obiect of dedication [v.31.1.4bject of offering [v.41.1.5Summary of these meanings [v.51.2vow10)[v.6〓.3purpose
1.3.1Good place to be entered [v.7]1.2puppose to enter [v.8]1.3.3what are to be entered1) wv.9-1014benefits to enter itwv.11-12]1.3.5manners to enter it [vv.13-14〓main part of the text〓.1Summary of the text [vv.15-16]〓.2detailed explanation2.2.1definition of nature of the middle2.2.1.1Summary on the middle13) [wv.17-21]〓.2.1.2synonyms of the middle [wv.22-22.2.1.3negation to misunderstand the middle [v.28cd]
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies38)〓n the first chapter ofthe dbu ma theg mchog by taranatha (k. mochzuk〓.2detailed explanation from the view point of path and its result (in followingchapters)
3.complete perfectionThe main theme explains the nature of the middle and begins with the seventeenth verse.The previous sixteen verses compose the introduction to the text. Further this chapter alsocontains a summary of the whole text, and detailed explanation begins with the next chap-ter. regarding the nature of the middle, he explains not only the madhyamika terins butalso those of the yogacara, because he explains the great Madhyamaka with the tetms likesuchness, buddha nature, the supreme self, etc. and counts the synonyms of the middlewith the three characters (trisvabhava).Inconclusion we can summarize the characteristic contents of the dbu ma theg mnchogas follows.1)taranatha understands the middle as  the great Madhyamaka.2)the struc-ture of this textis based on the basis, the path and the result which is the basic structure ofthe ri chos nges 〓o mtsho by dol po pa.The Tibetan text ofthe dbu ma theg mchog chapterl**〓 theg mchog shin tu rgyas pa'i dbu ma chen po inam par nges pa zhes bya babzhugs 
ド*〓om s4si / theg mchog shin tu rgyas pa'i dbu ma chen po tnam par nges pazhes byaba/
bla ma dang sangs rgyas dang byang chub sems dpa' thams cad la phyag 'tshallorgyal ba kun 'dus rgyal ba'i sras po'i tshulrgyal ba'i chos 'dzin rgyal dang mdzad pa mtshungsrgyal mchog mtshungs med rgyal bas lung bstanprgyal de 'dren mchog rgyal bar yid gnyis spangs /[]gang zhig tshul khrims shin tu rnam par dag/gang 'di shes bya'irnam pakun la mkhasgang la byang chub sems kyi ngang tshul yodgang dag de gsum lan pa phyag gi gnas]gang zhig nga rgyal phrag dog rtsub sems medgang zhig chos dang dam pami spong balgang zhig rang giyon tan ngom mi byed//
The japanese association of indian and budchist studieson the fist cheplerof the dbumoiheg mchogby Tanaita (kmczus)139.gang hig de de'ang dam pa yinphyirmosgang zhig dgongs pa zab mo nges par'rel /gang lasngon med yang dag lta bas mdzes/gang ' di rtse gcig sgrub la mngon par brtson/gang las (l. a)mmad byung yamtshan gus pagnas[4]ton pa bzhi ldan kun mkhyen jo nangpa//nges pa'i (D.2a) don du sems dpa che yinla/nangl6) ngorgong du smos pa ichos kun ltbrel tshad don mchog sbyorbaii 'phin17)gang 'di"i grub mtha' rmad byung bargyal ba kun gyi nges gsang 'di 〓ring nas sbas pa slar spel phyir /de gsungmnam par bshad parbya[6cdir ni gnas lugs 'khrul ba spangs pa yi tgzhi lam 'bras bu"i grub mtha' ma nor ba/skyon kun las grol dbu ma'i chos mchog stegang la jug paiyul 'di18)nes parbzung [7bla med byang chub sgrub la thun mong minpa'irgyu/mam par19)grol ba mchog dang bde ba'irgyur'gro ba/dad dang snyingjie shes rab mtshungs med 'di las 'byung"dgos pa gang gi phyir du jugpa de yinno[8nges don mdo dang sa bcu'i dbang phyug dang //drang nges 'byed par lung bstn20phags pa'i mchog /thog med habs te mkhas (l. 2b)pa'i gtsugrgyan bcasspros bralrig par lung bstan klu srub sogs[dam pa'i gsung lalegs par brten21shing rta chen porrlom22)(D.2b) zhing rags/mmongs pa'ang gya gyu spyodmnams kyiltshigni yid ches min pas spangsgsung rab don kun legs rtogs dang //bdud kyilam las23)da' ba dang //las kyi sgrib pa zad 'gyur dang //
The japanese association of indian and buddhist studiesonthe pirst chapter ofte dbn maheg mchog by taranatha (k. mochzuKI)bsod nams24)pag med phul byung thob [sangs rgyas nyid kyang thob 'gyurba5'di la zhugs pa'i phan yonte //chos gzhan bskal par spyad las kyang /'dimi yudtsam spyad pa'ang mchog/[2]iiltar jug tshul ci zhena//tshad ma'ilung girjes brang zhing //rigs pa'iyan lag tshang bas 'jug/khas milen pa'ig-yo sgyu bkag/[3gang la 'jug dang dgos pa gang phyir juggang la rten nas jug dang de lani/zhugs paiphan yonjiltar jug tshulte/thog mar dge ba'ingomtsharmam inga'o[14]don dam de bzhin nyid bdag dam pa"i bdag/don dam cha med kun 'gro khyab pa bo26bdag med bde gshegs snying po bdag gi mchog/gnas lugs dbu ma chen po'gyur ba med/'di (l. a) don ma rtogs mmongs shing 'khrul alasgzhi dus glo bur' khor ba"i chos rnamsshar 〓de 'dra rtogs pa'itshul nilam zhes byairangrang dri mas dag tshe bras burbtags[]dbu ma'i don gyi mdor bstan 'di yin te /togs bya gnas lugs don gyi dbu madang/rtogs byed nyams myon27amgyi dbuma'ozhi bras enyis gadan28)po'i khongs2)s[7]de la re zhig srid pa"i chos mnams ni/snang grags kunrdzobmam par shes paiyul/don dam dbyingsniye shes spros pas dbengdod nas zhibamyang das chos nyiddo[mam shes ye shes rgyal khams so so dang//kun rdzob don dam so sor bden tshul dangrang bzhin gcig kyang gcig las grol ba dang/
The japanese association of indian and budchist studieson the first chapter ofthe dbu ma theg mchog by taranatha(mtshan nyid 'gal yang tha dad pa las grol/[(d.3a) ye shes'gyur med ngo bos yod na yang/gcig shos nam yang1grub pa med pa'iphyir〓nedlagcig dang tha dad gang yang med/skye 'gag rtag chad 'gro 'ong yod mayitshul 'di rtogs na theg chen mtha' dag togs //dima rtogs pas rtag chad g-yang sar ihung /sod nams33)chen pos don 'digo bar (l.3b'gyur /blo mchog mnams kyis 'di la nges pa rnyed [2tsho ba mtha' gnyis spangs pa dbuma'ilamspyod pa'ang blang dor ma nor dbu ma ste //sgompa'i zhi lhag zung jug dbu ma yin/lta ba'i gnas skabs kun tu dbuma sbyar //[2]bdag dang byed pos stong pas yod mtha spangs //rgyu 'bras mi bslu chad pa'i mtha' dang bral//sems rgyun tsam las nga bdag gzhan med phyir//rtag par gnas dang sngar byung chad pa med " [cun brtags nam yang med mod 'khrul ngor snangkumrdzob tsam laltos24)paidbuma'phyirol don spangs35)semsnisna tshogssnang/mal 'byorpa yikun rdzob dbu mayin4]sems de gsal bar 'char yang rang bzhin med//inam grangs tsam gyidon dam dbu mar 'dodyongs grub kho na gnyis kyichos bral ba//don dam dbuma zhes byarrgyal rnams bzhed2inampa thams cad nyid kyangmi 'gyur ba//de ni dbu ma'i mtshan nyid mthar thug yin/mkhas dang grub parrlom zhing khas len pa//phal cher zab don 'di la rab tu 'khnul/[26kunrdzob snang ba rten 'brelmi'gal yang /nges pai don du 'di dag gang yang med/(L.4a)de ltarston pa'ang bden pa gnyiskala/
k. mocmizukl)(141)
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS一n the first chapter of the dbu ma theg mchog by taranatha (k. mochzuK1)rten pa'i dbu ma yin te thun mong lags 7]pbras bu don dang sku gnyis yontan laskhyab dang rtag pa'i don gyi dbu ma'omed par smra ba chad ltar ' gyur ba ste /gnyis min smra ba de dag lta ci smod.3b)zhes pa dbu ma"i rang gzhin ngos bzung ba'i rab tu byed pa ste dang po'Notes:
1)dmp'i chos io che 'phgs p'i yul du ji lar dar ba'i ishul gsal bar stonp dgos 'dodku'byung. dzam thang ed.,145-749.2)〓 the recent studies we can find the following studies: klaus-dieter mathes, "Taranatha'sTwenty-one differences with regards to the profound meaning." journal of the internationl-sociationofbuddlhist studies, 27-2,2004,pp.285-328english translation of his b gergci pa,willa baker, 〓ssence oambrosia, dharamsala. library of tibetan works and ar-chives, 2english traislation of his yGyl b'i bsm'u p'i i skyes bu gsumgyi mn ngag gi khrid yi bcd rtsi'i smying khu) ; jeffrey hopkins, the essence of other-emp-tiness byaranatha, ithaca. snow lion publications, 07(english translation of the gzhamstong snying po); david templeman, turaratha's bka" babs b ldn the seeistrnctionLineages, dharamsala: library of tibetan works and archives,198(english translation of hisbk' bbs b gyi brgyd p'i rnam thar).3)Ihave been studying the idea ofthe great madhyamaka in the works of dipamkarasrljnana (oratisa) and its development in tibet. See also kaie mochizuki, "is dipamkarasriinana a mad-hyamika?"inagoya studies iindicm culture ad buddhism sambhs,pp.99-1264)we know his collcted works in three versions: 1)rie-btsun t-na-tha'i gun 'bum.〓rols.20, 'dzam than dgon, Sichuan, w.22276(work number of tibetan buddhist resourceCenter, ;2)the collected works ofj-n rie-btsuaranatha, Reproduced foma set ofprints fom the rtag brtu-fshogs-glin blocks preserved in the library' ofthe st place inladukh,17vols., leh,1987,delhi: printed at jayyed press. w. 22277,3)jo nang rjebiur n th'i gsung 'bum dpe bsdur m odso drug p bzhugs,4 vols, 28,pecin. mirigs dpe sknun khang(=M).in the previous year, the series of jo nang pa works is published aslo nang dpe tshogs (Jonang publication Series by the same publication and the dbu mctheg mnchog is compiled with its commentaty in the tenth volume.5)1)zb mo n stong dbu md'i brgyud 'debs. d18,2)rgyu 'bs cbu m'i thig le.d189-14,3)Theg mchog shintu rgs p'i bu ma cheno rmpr nges pa. d.1819-89,4)〓har thug dbu m chen o ig rtenig rten's p'i chos thams cd doi gad bsm bcyid bzi or bu lc bu snying po nges zes by ba grub mthd'i mthar thug. d.191-107;5)gzhn stong dbu m'i rgar. d.819-129,6gzhon stong dbu ma'i rg'an gyi lung sbyor.d.18131-170,7)gzhm song snpying po. d.181710-193(see hopkins, op. cit.).
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studieson the First chapter ofthe dbuma theg mchogby Taranatha (k. MochizukI)(146)d. w.22276, vol.182307, volume number of the pdf fileby Trc),19-89,l. w.22277,vol.17(2329),1-106,m. vol.78,pp.1-; j. vol.10,pp.1-53.7)d. w.22276,vol.22,5-577,m. vol.85,pp.1-479, j. vol.10,pp.55-401.8)on the japanese translation of the first chapter with its commentary see my "on the dbumtheg mchog by taranatha (in Japanese) " handed out at this conference.9)according to the commentary, this is kun mkhyen chos kyirgyal po, who discerns the systerof the other-emptiness or great Madhyamakain Tibet first.10)this is to spread the tenet of the other-emptiness or the great Madhyamaka.11)they are the definitive scriptures, the works of asanga and nagarjuna.12)they are five, 1) to understand the meaning of discourses, 2) to pass over the path of demon3)to exhaust karmic obscuration,4) to obtain especially immeasurable merits and5) to obtaiibuddhahood.
13)there are two kinds of summaries, the middle ofthe ultimate truth which is to be realized andthe middle which yogins are to realize in the five kinds of the paths.14)l. sva.15)d. spongs pa.16)l. snong.17)d. phrin.18)l.dis.19)l.pa.20)d. brtan.21)l. rton.22)l. rlob.23)l.〓s a.24)l. rnams.25)l. gpur pa.26)l. po.27)d.myongs.28)l. sang.29)d. khong.30)l. dbyen.31)d. yod.32)l. mdc3)l. rnams.34)l. bltos.35)d. spang.36)l. pa'o.〓
(This research is supported in part bya grant-in-aid for jSPs(Key words> taranatha, kun dga' snyingpo, jo nang pa, dbu ma theg mchog(professor, minobusan university)
