The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesjournal of indiam and budchist studies vol.58,no.3, March(1(The background of huiyuan's philosophy: hisTwofold interpretation of the ""ten mysterious Gates"NAkanISHi Toshihide1.IntroductionHuiyuan慧苑(673?-7432was a disciple of Fazang法藏(643-712),who was thethird patriarch of the huayan School inchina. although huiyuan's philosophy has beerstudied extensively, a large portion of the preceding studies have focused on the differenc-es between the teachings of Huiyuan, fazang and chengguan澄觀(738-839).little atten-tion has been paid to huiyuan's original thought and its background. in this paper, aftersurveying huiyuan's thought on the basis of his classification of all the doctrinal categoriesof buddhism, we focus on his original teaching, particularly, his twofold interpretation of the"Ten mvsterious Gates"(十玄門).This paper also discusses the background of his thought,which was influenced by the awakeningoffaith  and Fazang's personal interpretatiorof the aF.
2.four classes of TeachingsIn his writing the kamding ii(刊定記),huiyuan classifies all the doctrines of buddhisminto the following four classes of teachings. "erroneous teachings"(迷眞異執教)," quarte:teachings"(眞一分半教),"half teachings"(眞一分滿教),and "complete teachings"(眞具分滿教).The four classes of teachings can be schematized as follows(4)complete teachingstathagata-garbha Thought. huayan buddhism(華嚴教學)lt is important to note that huiyuan places the tathagata-garbha doctrine and huayanBuddhism in the same class(4).In this matter, we can consider that huiyuan reflected thechange in Fazang's thought: in the latter half of his life, Fazang eventually recognized the
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSthe background of hluiyuan's philosophy (t. nakanishi)importance of the tathagata-garbha doctrine.This relation between the tathagata-garbha doctrine and huayan buddhism is one ofthe characteristics of huiyuan's philosophy and a primary component of chengguan's crit-icism. furthermore, it is closely connected with the background of the twofold doctrine ofthe ten mystetious gates.3.Twofold interpretationofthe "Ten mysterious Gates"a feature of huayan buddhism is that it gives a clear explanation of the metaphysicalvision in vairocana's intent contemplation, which is impossible to express by means oflanguage. nonetheless, the doctrine of the Ten mysterious Gates which was expressed byFazang aims to express this vision. There are some differences with regard to the namesapplied to the ten mysterious gates in zang's writings, however, he remains consistentwith this concept of the ten mysterious gates, which is based on ten perspectives express-ing a worldview of the buddhovatumisakasutraas)〓"the inexhaustible dependent co-arising"(無盡縁起).〓n one hand, huiyuan's understanding of the ten mysterious Gates is quite differentrom fazang's. he proposes a twofold concept for the ten mysterious gates -the "attri-butes"(徳相)and the " action""(業用).in the following paragraphs, we will consider thechange in the concept of the ten mysterious Gates. huiyuan subtilizes the fourth category(4)into two levelsthe "non-obstruction between the absolute and the phenomenal"(理事無〓)and the "non-obstruction between the phenomenal and the phenomenal?(事事無〓)and attributes the bas to the latter.Inan attempt to amplify the content of the baSin the kanding ji, huiyuan applies atwofold concept of the ten mysterious Gates, which he describes as follows第七、顯義分齊者,於中有別、有通。別,謂隨會、隨品、隨文句字等,一一皆有義分齊故通,謂一部大宗義之分齊。今此所辨,唯通非別,謂即事事無尋法界宗中義之分齊爾。於中初辨相、後問答。前中三:一體事、二徳相、三業用。初、體事者,即是徳、用所依,此通二種。(〓0-b)
From this passage, it is clear that huiyuan elaborates the content of the baSby divid-ing it into the following three categories: the ""substance"(體事)," attributes", and "action."This interpretation is distinct from those advanced by fazang and his master Zhiyan智儼〓8)in their commentaries on the bas. however, in tetms of the namnes like the
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesabove three and the structure of the thought -the metaphysical concept can be divided intothree categories basedon abstract logic, we can suppose the three great fundamentals in the〓"substance"(體),"characteristics"(相),and function"(用).we may say that hui-yuan developed his interpretation in the context of the aF.Next, we consider the content of the twofold ten mysterious Gates i concrete termsIn the kanding ji, huiyuan explains the element of "attribute"" as follows.、徳相者,謂相即、相在等由佛菩提無染依止,莫不皆以眞如爲體。眞如〓具過恒沙徳,眞所起事徳量亦然。是故此事徳相一同眞性,無〓自在。(x0529a)第二、徳相者,第八迴向説眞如一百門徳皆名眞如相。又《起信論》云:"眞如相大者,具足無量性功徳故。"此徳即是相,名徳相也。今此將顯如所起果故,以如徳而名其果。(〓5〓2b-43a)
it is clear from the passage that huiyuan describes the "non-obstruction between phe-nomena and phenomena" by the logical structure of the tathagata-garbha doctrine. heclearly states that the substance of the " attribute"" is suchness (tathata眞如)and explainsthat this non-obstruction is effected through the medium of the merits of the suchness, ad-ditionally, looking at its content, as is the case with Fazang's Ten mysterious Gates, the"attribute" describes the worldview of the baS.The latter clarifies that huiyuan intends to explain the vision of vairocana's enlighten-ment - described as the "attribute," for which he refers to the translation of the baSineighty juan八十華嚴(t10160b) and the af (t32575c) the basis of not only theBaSbut also the aF,Huiyuan explains the concept of "action"(業用)as follows:三、業用者,謂佛菩提證得淨法界故,成就通明、三味、解脱,而能於彼染、淨體事示現自在相作、相入等。(〓29a)第三、業用中二先、通顯所因,後、別辨其相。前中謂佛、菩薩成就無〓法界相應三味、通明、解脱、陀羅尼等用。前體事對應度耆轉變自在,此所轉境通於染、淨。(〓)here, he states that after having achieved enlightenment. buddha and the bodhisattvasadapt themselves according to those they have to save, and their actions in response to botrimpure and pure pervade both sides, the focus of "action"" is the blessing of the buddha andthe bodhisattvas.other noteworthy features of huiyuan's twofold interpretation of the ten mysteriousGates are as follows. althoughno evidence is available. it can be inferred from the concept
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesof eattributes"built on the "greatness of the attributes of suchness"(相大)-that huiyuandescribes the "action" as the "greatness of the activities of suchness""(用大).on the otherhand, inf, the " greatness of the activities of suchness"7is of two kinds. The frst is " per-meation through manifestation of the essence""(自體相熏習).This permeation depends ongood nature, which is inherent in the minds of all living creatures. The second is " perme-ation through the external influence of suchness"(眞如用熏習).Such permeation dependso buddhas blessings.As stated above, huiyuan consistently applies this "greatness of the activities of thesuchness" as the "permeation through external influences", to his interpretation, which isbasedofazang's commentary on the treatise yiii(義記).Inthe yiii, Fazang comments as follows:用大者,謂隨染業幻、自然大用,報、化二身龜、細之用,令諸衆生始成世善、終成出世故也。下文顯之。何故唯言善不云不善者,以不善法違眞故,是所治故,非其用也。若爾諸不善法應離於眞。釋云:以違眞故,不得離眞,以違眞故,非其用也。(T442a)according to this comment, different from the primary meaning of the af, fazang re-stricts the "greatness of the activities of suchness" to the "reward body"2(報身)and the"etransformation body"(化身)in the stage of attainment, and interprets it as a blessing in thisstage. thatis, the "action" that iuiyuan defends is based on this interpretation of Fazang.In addition, the " attribute" describing huiyuan's worldview of the bas concurs withFazang's ten mysterious Gates. The "action", however, is aconcept newly created by hui-yuan, and herein lies his originality. Namely, huiyuan thought a great deal about buddha'sblessing and added its aspects to the ten mysterious gates4.Conclusion
we have considered the twofold ten mysterious gates. huiyuan developed the conceptof eaction""(業用)in the context of the aF and Fazang'scommehtary. The other conceptof "attribute"(徳相)is based on the " greatness of the attributes of suchness"(相大),inconclusion, the twofold ten mysterious Gates is based on the doctrine of the af and Fa-zang's interpretation of it. Furthermore, we may say that the twofold ten mysteriousGates, which is the basis of huiyuan's thought, is largely attributable to the af. addition-ally, as opposed to Fazang's Ten mysterious Gates, which expresses a world-view of theBAS. Huiyuan's twofold ten mysterious Gates includes the aspect of the buddha's bless-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesing. we can consider the inclusion of this aspect in the ten mysterious gates to be huiyu-an's original contribution.The bias of placing great importance on the aF, as is the case with the four classes ofteachings, huiyuan foregrounded the change in fazang's thought, however, huiyuan con-structs his thought built oF, and lays more emphasis on the af than did fazang. Fur-thermore, as previous studies have pointed out, the thought of wenchao文超,who was alsoone of Fazang's disciples, is influencedby fazang's interpretation of the a , particularly,the two aspects of suchness-immutable and mutable""(不變・隨縁).Thus, af had agreater influence on scholars of huiyuan and wenchao's generation. Thus, it is no exagger-ation to say that the logical structure of huayan buddhism of the time was greatly subiectto aF. In addition, to better understand the factor of this bias, without being overly con-ceined about the framework created after the time of the huayan Schoolichina. it is nec-essary to examine not only the literature of huayan buddhism but also the buddhist litera-ture of huiyuan's time.(This research was supportedin part by a grant-in-aid for jSPS fellows.)dotes: )cf. sakamoto [1956: pp.-14].the dates pertaining to huiyuan from the extant biog-hy are not clear.2)e.g, sakamnoto [1956 pp.297], yoshizu[9pp,Li [2000].3)cf.kimura [1992: p.207]t:大正新脩大藏經taisho shinshu daizokyo (aizo shuppansha) x〓續藏經wan xuzangjing (xin-wen-feng press.) bas. buddhavatamsakasutra八十華嚴:大方廣佛華嚴經dafamg-guong fo huayc jing (taisho vol10,no.279.)aukening offaith大乘起信論(taishoVol.32,no.1666.)mi(義記):dacheng qixinun yii大乘起信論義記(taisho vol.44,no.846.)kanding ) (刊定記)〓u huayan lieshu kanding fi續華嚴略疏刊定記(zokuzokyovol.5, pp.640.)Sakamoto, yukio(坂本幸男)[19]kego kyogaku no kenkyu, kyoto: heirakuii-shoten.Yoshizu, yoshihide(吉津宜英)[198 studies on the historical thought ofa-yeTokyo: daito-shuppansha.Li, hu-ynng(李惠英)[200]a sudy ofhui-ynueue-shu gn-ding qi, tokyo:Doho-sha.
Kimura, kryotaka(木村清孝)[1992]chugoku kegonshisoshi, kyoto: heirakuii-shoten.<key words) huiyuan(畫苑),Fazang(法藏),ten mysterious gates(十玄門),xu hayan hiieshukandingii(續華嚴略疏刊定記),awakeningoffith(大乘起信論)(Graduate student, The university of tokyo, jSPS research Fellow c1))
