The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesThe interpretation of adibuddha:As described in the vamasamgiti commentariesShAkYa Sudan
1.IntroductionThe buddhist Tantra namasamgiti (c.700, hereafter ns) comprises of800 variousnames for manjusri or manjusrjnanasattva,1 and vajratiksana, arapacana, sarasvati, va-gisvara, Yamantaka are some of them. The name adibuddha (tib. dang po'i sangs rgyas, chbenchufo本初仏,primordial buddha, the firstly awakened one) is also one of the names whichisused to praise manjusti. this paper will examine how this adibuddha is interpreted bydifferent commentators in their ns commentaries.2.The commentaries to the nSThere are numerous works related to the vamasamgiti. regarding the ns commentaty,it counts more than twenty commentaries which are written from three different stand-points:)yogatantra, (〓i)Yogottaratantra, (〓)kalacakratantra.〓 The limited spacedoes not allow us to deal with all those commentaries, and hence, this paper will only focuson the 12selected comnmentaries, which are listed in the referenccs.3.The adibuddha in the nconcerning the ns, the praising name for manjusri , adibuddha appears only a singletime and is the first appearance in the whole buddhist tantric texts.4 The 10 verse ofthe nvs reads:He is the one without the beginning and termination, he is the enlightened one, the primordial bud-lha (adibuddha), he is the person without any connection. he bears single eye of gnosis, he isstainless, he is gnosis embodied and the tathagata.〓Now we will discuss how the name adibuddha is interpreted in the above nentionedNS commentaries.4.The adibuddha in the yogatantra-commentariesat first. we will see the sixns commentaries described from the yogatantra stand-point. Maniusrimitra who flourished in the mid 8th century authored the vrtti, and which is
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesconsidered as the first and the oldest commentaty to the nvs among those cxist today. mainj-usrimitra inteiprets the adibuddha as follows:Since he realized all the dharma, 'he is buddha'. The "anadinidhana' means without beginning andwithout termination. The one who doesn"t have beginning and ending is called without beginningand without tetmination' and he is dharmakaya in nature. he is characteristic of dharmakaya fronthe very beginning and so he is adibuddha. as he is not generated fron any cause, he is "withoutmny connection' without cause.〓Maniusrimitra states the adibuddha as the existence that does not bear any beginningand termination; rather he is the truly characteristic of dharmakaya from the very begin-ning.
vilasavaita, known as a disciple of maniusrimitra, is an influential ns commentator.hie authored the . where he describes the adibuddha asadibuddha is the one who is enlightened from the very beginning, and having the nature of the fivekinds of gnosis (nana).7on the other hand, smrtiinanakirti translated vilasavaira's nd introduced itsTibetan version in the 11century and also authored a ns commentary by himself. hiscommentary, the bhasya has the following description of the adibuddha:As for ' [he is] the adibuddha and without cause", it follows that first he is the buddha embodiedwith the very five inanas, and secondly he is the nitmanakaya who manifests everywhere.〓Here, vilasavaira and Smtijnanakirti both spell out the adibuddha as the one who isbuddha from the very beginning, and he bears the nature of the five jnanas -adrsa, praty-aveksa, samata, krtyanusthana, suvisuddhadharmadhatu-of the five tathagatas.ltis noteworthy to point out that in the dvthe adibuddha conducts asa obiect forvisualization. The chapter four of the n describes the process of meditation called"Mayalalabhisambodhikrama", where the five-faced and eight-armed adibuddha is visual-ized.9) Interestingly, the v-vrtti of candrabhadrakirti also identifies the adibuddha as theBuddha with five faces and eight arms.10.The largest nvs commentary from the yogatantra-class is the fika by maniusrikirti of1 century. in this commentary, he interprets the adibuddha in two ways.He is dharmakaya in nature from the very beginning. Thus he is adibuddha.1,Again, regarding the dharmakaya, his explanation follows.he is the being who neither bears the beginning nor bears the termination. and he is without begin-ning and without termination (anadinidhana), and so that he is dharmakaya.12
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies46)the interpretation of adibuddha (S. ShakYaReferring the citation from the paramadyatantra (h487,ota119)the second interpretation opens aslt states that the being without beginning and without termnination is called vairasattva, bearing thehighest happiness. as it is stated, the buddha is vaitadhara with the bodhi-mind in nature. Thus heis the adibuddha.13)*Madhyamikananda who closely followed the tradition of Maniusrikirti. the dharmad-hatuvagisvara school, also authored the vs commentary called paniiko, and it is the sum-narized fomm of the tiko.14i the case of adibuddha, * Madhyamikananda also summa-izes manjusrikirti's interpretation,1 citing from the paramadyatantra where it states thaVajradhara with the highest happiness is the buddha who has no beginning andno ending,and so that he is the adibuddha.65.The adibuddhain the yogottaratantra commentarieswe will next see the three ns commentaries, described from the yogottaratantra stand-point. in the 〓-tiku , candragomin intetprets the verse ns-100ab as follows:The "beginning" is the one who is free from the growth, and tenmination' is the one who is freefrom cessation. "The adibuddha' means dharmakaya, and without any connection' means that hes disconnected from any kind of connection.Interpreting the adibuddha as the dharmakaya is similar to the above mentioned inter-pretations of maniusrimitra, vilasavaira, maniusrikirti, and madhyamikananda.The dipa of vimalamitra is not the word for word commentary and it explains theAdibuddha as follows:He is a buddha (the awaken one), "the beginning' means the one who doesn't have the obiect oforigination, and "termination' means the one who doesn"t have the place to go.1vimalamitra comments the adibuddha as the one that neither bears origin nor tetiminus, and he does'tossess any connection from the very beginning.[n the abhisamaya, advayavaira interprets the adibuddha as follows:The anabhoga by nature and abhimukha are the one taste of the highest happiness. Thus "he isAdibuddha, with no connections", and he does not depend on any kinds of connection.1シadvayavajra interprets the adibuddha as the iature of anabhoga who does not dependupon any connections and does not need any effort to grow. that is to say, it does not seekany cause for origination.6.The adibuddhain the kotacakratantra-related commentariesThe adibuddha is one of the kev words for the kalcakrutantra, which is the abridged
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudies〓
volume of the basic root tantra of the paramadibuddha and pundarika's kalacakratantracommentary, the yimalaprabha shows their close relationship.2Now we will see the three interpretations of adibuddha seen in the kolacakratantrc-related commentaries. at first, in Ravisriinana's tippani, the description of adibuddhaopens as follows:The adibuddha is the happiness (which is obtained by process of) the single moment, the five as-pects, the twenty aspects and the characteristic of perfect enlightenmentof the illusion-net" yaialabhisambodhi).1)This is the citation from the vimalaprabha of pundarika's.)Ravisrij nana values thevimalaprabho, and we can see many citations from it.Narendrakirti. who lived in mid11〓 century, provides the following explanation:It explains that "the buddha without beginning and end' is the buddha of the three realms. The ac-tion that performedin the pastis 〓beginning" andit is the cause. the (action) ofelimination is 'endand cannot be eliminated under any conditions. The does not exist' is that there is no existenceof) the cause of origin and the condition of elimination, and it means he is the self-existent (svay-mmbhu).after completing this very explanation, it is stated that 'he is the adibuddha without anyconnection'.23)Narendrakirti equates the adibuddha as the self-existent (svayambhu). when we gothrough pundarika's -vprabha, we attain the similar interpretation which opens as.Since he is without beginning. he is self-existent (svayambhu) and he is "the buddha' without be-ginning. The being without elimination is "without end'. Thus he is the being, who awakened frorthe very beginning. he is the being who appears neither with means nor with wisdom.〓It seems that according to the kulacakratantrd-related commentaries, in the ns text theself-extent (svayambhu ) depicts as a name of maniusri. The explanation shows that thesvayambhu is not the self-born, but rather it is the one that does not possess any beginning.7.conclusion
The adibuddha is a very important keyword in the buddhist Tantric texts, and beingNS the first buddhist Tantric text that depicts the adibuddha, its interpretations found inthe different ns commentaries provide a significant sketch of it. The main points of theabove discussion are summarized here.(1)〓ns commentaries written from the Yoga or yogottara standpoints, "the adibuddha"is often interpreted as dharmakaya, and he is the one who is enlightened from the vety be-ginning. and, it is noteworthy to reiterate that the adibuddha conducts as aobiect for vi-
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies148)the interpretation of adibuddha (s. shakya,sualization. vilasavaira and candrabhadrakirti visualize the adibuddha as the four-facedand four-armed deity.(2)it is obvious that kalacakratantru-related vS commentaries. especially narendrakirtiand Ravisriinana interpret the adibuddha as the self-existent (svayambhu), and which hasneither beginning nor termination. This means he is free from origination and destruction.Inthe later petiod, the adibuddha is equated as svayambhu.(3)In the ns text, the adibuddha is none other than the praising name for maniustiinana-sattva like pancainanatnaka (having the nature of five gnosis, NS-59b), ianakah sarvabuddha-nam (the producer of all the buddhas, nS-60a), sarvabuddhasvabhavadhrk (bearer of the natureof all the buddhas, nS-141d.Notes
〓
1)bhattacharyya1967127chapter 61,dharmadhatuvagisvarasadhana) astasatanamadheyamca namasamgitim yathakalam pathediti.2)there has been much work on the concept of adibuddha. newman987, togano1989,Shakva. hammar 2009are some of them3)suda:311.
4)in the buddhist literature mhoyanasutralamkara  the word adibuddha appears first-ly where it is interpreted as the first enlightened one, the buddha (levi190748).again itmight be worth pointing out that the gaudapada (-7ce),a well know vedanta scholar uses theadibuddha in his guudapadiiy- kuriku -94),a commentary of the hondukyopanisad. in thiscontext. the adibuddha is interpreted as the original knowledge.adibuddhah prakrtyaiva sarve dharmah suniscitahl yasyaivam bhavati ksantih so 'mrtatvyayakalpate 〓 bhattacharyya: 1-202.nakamura:493.5)davidson:57(.1-2).mhadinidhano budcha adibuddho niranvayah/ jnanaikacaksur amalo jnanamurtis tathagatah6)vrtti p.,i.19l.47)cambridge manuscript no add.178).np2,〓l.8-9.idibuddha iti adav eva buddha adibuddhah s ca pancajnanatmakah/(77al).8)bhasyp,〓-.
9)the four-faced vairocana with the bodhyagra gesture is visualized which is generated fromthe svllable ah. Then the syllable dhh is visualized at the moon-dlisc in his heart. from this let-er. the five-faced, eight-handed adibuddha is generated having five knots of hair. Sakurai198796. sakurai 198814.10)〓-vrtti p.8,ll12-16.11)ykp.611,i.2-p612,i.1.12)tikp.611,l.15-17.13)tika.612,.-.6,i.1.14)Shakya8312-33.15)paniiko p.13,1.7-10.16)to interpret Mahavairocana or vajrasattva as the one without beginning and end is already
The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudiesadopted in the yogatantras like mahavairocanasiitra, tattvasamgraha and pamadyatantra (to-gano198700-702).17)〓-k,il.16-18.8)dipa p.5,〓l.5-8.19)abhisamyp2,〓.8-10.20)the paramadibuddha sometimes refer the root text itself, while sometimes it refers to the un-shakable highest happiness signifying the nature of the enlightenment (Hadano: 10).See, vi-malaprabho523-7).ekaksanapancakaravimsatyakaramayajalabhisambodhilaksanam sukham adibuddha ity arthah/[Tiku]
21)lal1997,ii.9-0tippai p.197,il.19-2.22)Vimalaprabho: p.17,i1.9-10.pundarika also authored the ns commentary n-vprabha aboutwhich we will discuss later. analyzing the relationship of vimalaprabha, n-vprabha and tip-pani could provide prominent information to identify the adibuddha.23)vyakhy,i15-19.24)-yprabha: p-4.References
The vamusamgiti commentaries (the content inside the[]shows the abbreviations)[Vrtti]
trtti]①manjusrimitra nomasamgitivrti Toh2532,ota3355,dvol.32,pp.3-70.[〓
〓②vilasavajra vamamantrarthavalokin oh233; ota3〓dvol.32,pp.71306.
〓ka③manjusrikirti aryamanjusrinamasamgititka thota357,zdvol.32.pp.07-811
pp.07-811.
[n-vrtti]④candrabhadrakinti tryyamamiusrinamasamgitinamavrtti toh235; ota3358〓dvol.32,pp.815-936.bhsy⑤smrtijnanakirti 〓aniusrinamasamgitilaksabhosya toh2538, ota61,zdvol.32,pp.990-1121.paniku]⑥*Madhyamikanandaryamaniusrinamasamgitipaniika toh254 ota483〓dvol.32.pp.1192-1396.〓-k⑦candragomiryamanjusrinamasamgitinamamahatiku oh20; ota3363,〓dvol.24,pp.1392.[dipa]
⑧vinalamitra namasamgitivrttinamarthaprakuisakaranadipanama toh2092,Ota29,dvol.25,pp.3-99.[abhisamaya]⑨advayavajra aryamanjusinamasamgitikasarabhisamaya toh8, ota2945〓dvol.2,pp.25-349.[tippan]⑩Ravisrijnana amrtakanikatippani toh195; ota2111d vol.8,pp.103-260.〓yakhy⑪narendrakirti aryyamanjusrinamasamgitipyakhyana toh197ota2113lVol.8, pp.33-490.〓-vprabha]⑫pundarika aryamanjusrinamasamgititikarimalaprabha toh138, ota2114〓dvol.8, pp.41-617.〓dzhonghua dazamgiing danzhuer, zhongguo zangxue Yanjiu zhongxin, peking.Bhattacharyya, b. (ed.) sadhanamcla vol-i,Gs. no.26,baroda,1968.davidson, ronald m. "The litany of names Maniusri', Tumtric d zaoist studies vol.1.bruxelles.
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe interpretation of adibuddha (S. shakYa)1981,pp.1-69[NS-means the verse no of davidson.hadano, llakuyu(羽田野伯猷)〓The fundamental problems on the genesis of the kalacakratantrg'Hadano hakuyu chibetto indogaku shusei (papers obet and indicn studies) volii,〓ozokan,1987,pp10-3[ japanese].Hammar, urban 'the concept of adibuddha in the kalacakratantra', as log a space endures:〓s the kalacukrc tamtrainhoorh. h. the dali lamq, snow lio publication. 200Lal, banarasi (ed.) ryamaniusrinamasamngiti witmrtakanikatipponi bhiksu ravisriinana adamrtakamikodyotamibanbdhaofvibhuticandra, cHTS, varanasi.1994.Minenori, matsumoto(松本峰哲)〓〓 quotations inTantradesanoddesa', the second chapter ofVimalaprabha" ronshu vol.24,1997,pp.1-16n japanese].Nakamura, haiime(中村元)shoki vedanta no tetsugokushi, iwanamishoten,1993.newman, johthe paramnadibuddhd (the kalacakra mulatantra) and its relation to the earlkalacukra literature , id-fronicm journal vol.30,1987,pp.93-102.sferra fransesco 〓 fragments of pundarika's paramarthaseva", indo et tibetic festschrift fur〓ichcel hahn, pp.476, wien, 2007.Sakurai, munenobu(桜井宗信)〓a study ohjam dpal gsan ldan school primarily based uponNamnamantrarthanalokin-(1)'mikkyogaku kenkyu vol19,1987,pp.87-109njJapanese].〓study on the namamcntrorthovalokinbuka vol.51(.4),1988,pp.1-32[n japanese].〓the namasamgiti: from recitation to meditation" ido koki mikkyo , Shunjusha,200,pp.115-130n japanese].shakya, sudan(スダン・シヤキャ)〓Manjusrikirti's interpretation on the namasamgiti" bukkyogakuvol.46,2004, pp.77-109in japanese].〓asuyo the namasamgiti: as described in the aryamaniusrinamasamgititika of anjusrikirt(doctoral Thesis, tohoku university,2005)[in Japanese].〓a study on manjusrikirti'aryamanjiusrinamasamgititiku: focusing on its textual characte1characteristics", proceedings of the international conference soferic buddhist, 2Svlvain levi hahoyunasutralamkura, paris, 1907,Togano. Shoun(栂尾祥雲)koki mfikkyo no kenkyutudiesjamtric buddhism) vol.i, rinsenBook,1989[i japanese].Upadhyaya. J. vimalaprabha of kalki sri-pundarikaoi-lagukalacakratantraraia by-any-usriy vol.I, cTS, varansi,198[Vimalaprabhd].vidhushekhara bhattacharya the agamasatrc of gaudapada, motilal banarshidass publisherspp.311-315.
delhi,1989,pp.201-202.(This research was supportedin part by a Grant-in-aid for JSPs Fellows.)<key words> adibuddha, svayambhu, dharmakaya, namcsamgiti, kalacakratantra(JSPsResearch Fellow, Ph.d
