The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesThe characteristics of "the Five chapters on the Various Godsand goddesses" in the suvarnaprabhosaSUZuKI Takayasu1.the aimof This paper: acontinuous verification of the hypothesisas has been discussed in the previous studies, the suvarnaprabhas utra of goldenlight, suv,) one of the mahayana buddhist scriptures which has collected and demon-strated various doctrines and nites of both mundane and supermundane levels, and has hadwide influence over the way of thinking and living of asians, seems to have been paidrather scant attention by the modern scholarly world partly because the intention of thecompilers of the suv has long renained unknown. in this relation, supported by some ar-cheological results, the present author, focusing attention on the complicated structure ofhe suv andin particular on the description in the caturmahuroia-parivarta,4 has alreadyproposed the following hypothesis on the intentions of the compilers of the suv:(The hypothesis)owing to the account of the suy which has, through the several stages of itsfoimation, collected and demonstrated the various kinds of doctrines and rites of both mundane ancsupermundane levels expounded previously in the treatises either of mahayana, of non-mahayana,or of non-buddhism ie., of hinduism), the compilers and the proponents of the suv became moreable to lead their daily religious lives, including their practice of various rites and their attainmentof various religious merits, in accordance with "the teaching of the suv," that is, " the teaching of[Mahayana] buddhism." we can therefore interpret the features appearing in the suv not as a tokenof "ethe assimilation of buddhism into hinduism" or the depravity of buddhism," but as an attemp.of buddhists to survive in the indian religious world by emphasizing the value, the usefulness, ancthe completeness of [mahayana] buddhism under the circumstances where hinduism had becomemore and more dominant over budchism during and after the gupta period). Moreover, if one ofthe intentions of the compilers of the s lies in this attempt by collecting as many doctrines andrites as possible. however of mundane or supermundane levels, or of buddhism or non-buddhismthey might be, from the stage of the formation of the su, to that of the suc, consistently, we cansuppose that the intention of the compilers has remained unchanged all through the stages of theformation of the suv. Furthermore, it may turn out that the sup is not " a mere miscellaneous med-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesThe characteristics of "the five chapters on the various Godsand goddesses" in the suvarmaprabhosa(t. suzuki)ley of doctrines and rites." but a collection ofthem which is intrinsic to the value of the suv.This paper continues to verify this hypothesis by examining the characteristics of "theFive chapters on the various gods and goddesses."5) since the examination of four chap-ters among the five has been made in a series of previous studies (see suzuki [2004,2005,〓006, and207]),we will begin with a brief survey of the saminaya-parivarta (chapter onthe great Yaksa general Samjnaya; chapter19 of the su), which is the fifth and final chapteiin "ethe five chapters on the various Gods and goddesses."2.abrief survey ofthe saminaya-pariparta (chapter on thegreat yaksa general samjnaya, chapter19)The saminoyc-parivarta can be divided into three sections (from〓lto〓3)as follows〓1:The great general ofthe Yaksas called samijnaya(僧慎爾耶薬叉大将),together withthe twenty-eight great Yaksa generals, vows to the lord sakyamuni that he shall approachany place wherever the suy goes forth, and with invisible body give protection, help,peace, and welfare to the clergyperson who preaches the suv. he shall also give protection,help, peace and welfare to all those laypersotis whoever should hear even one four-versestanza or even one verse from the suv, should hear even the nanne of the suv and accept it.Their dwelling places shall be also given protection, help, peace and welfare by him.Next, the great yaksa genetal Samjnaya gives the following explanation of why he hasbeen named Samjnaya.By him, all things are fully known, fully examined, fully comprehended, fully surveyed, and ful-ly perceived. all things ate apparent to him. the splendor, the extent, the quantity, and the spheref his knowledge are inconceivable. for this reason, he has been given the name saminaya. (Sum-matized, 〓uvs93-1308. see emmerick[19968-59].Then the great Yaksa general Saminaya makes a vow in the presence of the lord sa-kyamuni to offer both mundane andsupermundane merits to those who preach of hear thesuv, a few examples of which are to have happy senses, to be full of joy, or to experienceinconceivable divine and human pleasures (mundane merits), and to awaken to supreme andperfect enlightenment in future time (supermnundane merit). the preachers of the su shallbe granted eloquence, great energy, strength, prowess, and the inconceivable splendor ofknowledge.
with the end of his vow, the first chinese version , rendered by dharmaksema(曇無識)in the 5th century (412-421),the second chinese version Suv,combined by bao-gu)
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesthe characteristics of " the five chapters on the various godsand goddesses" inthe suvarnaprabhusat. suzuki)(寶貴)in597,the Sanskrit text uvs. and the smaller tibetan version su,conclude thisChapter19.
〓2.this 〓and the next 〓3only exist in the larger tibetan version uvr, and thethird chinese version suvcs rendered by yi-jing(義淨)in the year703The great Yaksa general Samjnaya states that he holds a spell (gzuns snags,* iharani ;jniags,* mantra, rig sniags, * idya) which can bring about the welfare and blessing to all sen.tient beings, andhe gives instructions how to employ itinvolving drawing the image (gzugs,*pratima) of saminaya, making an altar ckyil 'khor,* mandala), and practicing burnt-offering (sbin sreg, * homa). The holders of this spell can be blessed with the supply of hu-man blessing such as foods, cloths. flowers. fruits, fortunes, and jewels. according to theirwishes, they are also granted sons, daughters, servants, gold, silver, and other omaments.In the presence of those who have employed it one hundred and eight times, the greatYaksa general Saminaya shall make his appearance (ie. become visible) and grant whateverwishes of them such as being replete with gold, silver, and acquiring six supernatural pow-ers. moreover all sentient beings shall be able to attain the deliverance (rnam par grol ba,*vimoksa, vimukti) from evety affiction on mois pa thams c, *sarpaklesa).〓3.the lord offers congratulations to the great Yaksa general Samjnaya who has in-structed how to employ the spell in order to benefit all sentient beings and protect the su,and prophesies that he will obtain immeasurable merits.The structure of chaptei 19cn be tabled as follows.Table l.The structure of the saminoy-parivarta chapter 19)we can see from table l that the content of the saminoy-parivartg was enlargedthrough the two stages of formation.Chapter19), suvs, suvr(the first stage)〓r2, suvc3 (the secondand
last stage )

The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe characteristics of " the five chapters on the various Gods2)and goddesses" in the suvarnaprabhosat. suzuki)3.The characteristics of "the five chapters on the various Gods and Goddesses"what has to be noted first is that all the gods and goddesses in ithe Five chapters" havebeen beforehand listed twice in the caturmahoraia-parivarta which is the first chapter ofthem all.
[caturmaharajas said thus to the lord:]y the hearing of the su] there will arise umbrellas)f vines of various perfumes and fragrances, arriving at that instant, moment, second, in the skyabove the several palaces, dear lord, of Sarasvati, the great goddess, of drdha, the great goddess,of sri, the great goddess, of Samjnaya, the great general of the yaksas, and of the twenty-eighigrcat generals ofthe yaksas,.."(sus81-85.7. see emmerick [19964].)[caturmaharajas spoke thus to the lord:] "sarasvati, the great goddess, sii, the great goddessDrdha, the great goddess, Samjnaya, the great general of the yaksas, and the twenty-eight greatgenerals of the yaksas,.. , with invisible bodies [will approach for the hearing of the s"y91.15-92.4, see emmerick [19968].)Having examnined them, what is more, we find that " the five chapters"" and the godsand goddesses appearing in them have the following seven remarkable characteristics(from [-1]to [-7])incommon:〓
[C-1]aof the gods and goddesses in "the five chapters," that is, caturmaharajas, sarasvati,sri, the Earth-goddess, and Yaksas, are very popular deities in indian tradition.〓-2]when the supis expounded, these deities become powerful and vigorous enough to benefit and protect the sentient beings and their dwellings, villages, cities, forest-retreats, palaces,ountries, and regions. therefore the necessity for honoring the su and its preachers is muchemphasized.8)[c-3」]The acts ofbeneft and protection by these deities are carried out with invisible bodies.9〓-4] the merits granted by these deities are of both mundane and supermundane levels, that is,tot only the ones peculiar to buddhism but also those merits which are mundane and popular irIndia.
[〓-5]different kinds of hearers or proponents are expected in every chapter:Caturmahoroia-parivarta: the kings or the rulers, the greater part of whom might have beennon-buddhists during and after the gupta period. (See sandersona,204b, and]and suzuki [0520-23.)sarasvati-parivarta: those who are concerned with the ability of speech, extensive knowledgejf all the textbooks (e.g. brahmins), and success in the performance of various arts, and thosewho exercise the act ofritual bathing, that is, the greatest part of indian people.10)si-parivarta: those who are interested in increasing their fortune or wealth e.g. householdersor merchants. see suzuki [20643-45]).
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesthe characteristics of "the five chapters on the various godsand goddesses" in the suvarnaprabhusc t. suzuki)prdha-parivartg: those who were engaged in agriculture, that is, the farmers in india, thegreater partof whommight have not been buddhists at that time. (See suzuki[20076-70].)saminoya-parivarta: Those who have belief in Yaksas which had been widely spread ancaccepted in indian culture.11[〓-6]rites for both mundane and supermundane merits, which involve employing magic spells(mantra, dharani, or vidyd), are taught in the developed stages of formation.〓-7]the characteristics listed from [C-1]to []remain unchanged all through their varie.gated process ofcompilation. (See suzuki [225-26].)Taking these two factors (having the names of the deities listed in advance and sharingthe seven characteristics among the chapters) into consideration, we can say in the firstplace that "the five chapters" have been compiled under a unified editorial policy.secondly, [c-]indicates that the expected hearers or proponents of "the five chap-ters"" can include people of the various classes in indian society. Moreover the exercise ofritual bathing and the belief in yaksas had widely spread beyond the classes or their reli-gions in a narrow sense, and it may not be too much to say that having interest in the ac-quisition of and the increase in wealth is more or less one of the intrinsic tendencies of theordinary people. therefore it seems reasonable to suppose that the conpilers of the su.in preparing "the five chapters," might have intended to attract variouis kinds of peoplewhether thev were buddhists or not.Thirdly, the account that draws our attention most is that all those deities who accom-plish with invisible bodies the actof benefit and protection to the people ([-3]) have beenncouraged by the nectar juice of the suv, or to put it more directly, by the "grace" of thebuddhist monks (or nuns) who preach the suy-2]).on this assumption, it necessarilyfollows that the peace and security of a region, the stable sovereignty, the proper move-ment of the heavenly bodies in the caturmaharoia-parivarta), the eloquence in speech, theskillfulness in arts, the merits attained by the act of ritual bathing (inthe sarasvati-parivarta),the acquisition of and the increase in wealth (in the sri-parivarta), the increase in the mois-ture and the savor of the earth, the health and the longevity of the people who take the vari-ous tasty fruits and crops that have grown well in the strong earth (in the drdha-parivarta),and that themuch greater merits of both mundane and supermundane levels can be attainedby the belief incaturmaharajas, in Sarasvati, in sri, in the earth-goddess, and in yaksasthan bv the traditional belief before the s(all through the five chapters"),all these "merits"have already been, whether people may recognize the "grounds" or not, brought about in
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesThe characteristics of "the five chapters on the various godsand goddesses" inthe suvarnaprabhasa(t. suzuKi.secret by the invisible deities encouraged by the buddhist monks who had been "well hon-ored." if any misfortune or inconvenience occurs, it is to be attributed for the same reasonto the lack or the insufficiency of honoring the su and its preachers. Therefore those whowish thenselves well and to avoid any misfortune of inconvenience (see n.8),must pa)homage to and make offerings to the buddhist monks who hold and preach the suv.13)athese factors considered, it is highly probable that the unified editorial policy under whichthe Five chapters"" have been compiled should be associated with the intentions describedin the hypothesis).Finally, we must discuss the reason why "the five chapters"" conclude with the samin-〓y-parivarta. let us remember here the description in the caturmaharoia-parivarta citedinn.4. This description insists upon the superiority of buddhism over hinduism on thegrounds of the usefulness and the comnpleteness of the sup which comprehends the variouskinds of doctrines and rites of both mundane and supermundane levels, and of both bud-dhism and non-buddhism. in addition, the expected hearers of this chapter must be thosewho belong to foyal families. having associated with (the hypothesis>, this caturma-harojia-parivarta is supposed to be compiled to induce the people belonging to the class ofkings to become the proponents of the su in order to obtain their aid for the sake of ac-complishing the transmission of the law and religious practice for the supreme enlighten-ment.
In the saminay-parivarta, on the other hand, the main character is a Yaksa generawho has been given name Samjnaya. as illustrated inchapter 2of this paper, "by him,all things are fully known, fully examined, fully comprehended, fuly surveyed, and fullyperceived. all things are apparent to him." he is also described as the head of the twenty.eight great Yaksa generals (Sus128-5, etc.). these twenty-eight great Yaksa generals arefurthermnore explained in the caturmaharaic-parivarta as the chief retinues of caturmaha-taias (vs-2, etc.)To take all these factors into account, itcan be said that all things saminaya fully knowsmust include the various kinds of doctrines and rites of both mundane and supermundanelevels, and of both buddhism and non-buddhism, and that the existence or the faculty ofthe Yaksa general Samjnaya, who knows "all things," must be one of the main grounds thatenables caturmaharajas to emphasize the completeness of the suv to the members of royalfamilies. involving three intermediate chapters, that is, the sarasvati-parivarta, the sri-
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSthe characteristics of "the five chapters on the various godsand goddesses" inthe suvarnaprabhasa(t. suzuki)parivarta, and the drdha-pariparta, by which the compilers of the suv attempt to attracthe various kinds of people who can be govemned by the kings, " the five chapters" beginwith the caturmahuruia-parivarta and conclude with the saminaya-parivarta, the formerof which has been compiled for converting royal families to budchism. and the latter ofwhich can reinforce the discourse of the former.from the examination of "the five chapters" we can recognize the deep considerationof the compilers of the suv how to induce the kings to become their proponents. it wouldbe untrue to presume the expressions of this consideration confined only within "theFive chapters."after " the five chapters."" in fact. follows directly the devendrasamay-parivarta chapter on instruction concerning divine kings, chapter 〓 of the sw), which in-structs what a king should be who has to rule various people and exercise his kingship inorder to realize the welfare of the people.buddhism had once stood foremostin the religious world of india under the patronage ofthe great kings such as kingasoka of the Mautya empire or king kaniska of the kushanEmpire. however during and after the gupta period when the su was compiled, bud-dhism has been already lost its dominant position to hinduism. under such circumstancesthe commpilers of the suv, by obtaining various kinds of aid of the kings as well as of theirpeople, must have attempted to survive in the religious world for the sake of accomplishingthe duties ofthe buddhist clergy.4.conclusion
we can say, from what has been discussed above, that the validity of <the hypothe.sisy has been even more strengthened. "The Five chapters" begin with the caturmahuraia-parivarta which emphasizes the superiority of buddhism over hinduism and attempts toconvert the people of the class of kings to buddhism. after the successive attempts in thefollowing three chapters to attract the people of the various classes who are ruled by thekings, " the Five chapters"" conclude with the saminoya-parivartain whicha yaksa generalwho is the head of the chief retinues of caturmaharaias and knows all things whether ofmundane or supermnundane levels, and whether of Buddhism or non-buddhism, plays animportant role to reinforce the discourse of the caturmaharuia-parivarta.From the examination of "the five chapters" we can recognize the deep considerationof the compilers of the suv toward the members of royal families. from this consideration
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesThe characteristics of "the five chapters on the various Gods円and goddesses" in the suvarnaprabhisqt. suzuK)they have successively compiled the devendrasamoya-parivarta which follows directlyafter "the five chapters."1)suzuki, t. [1996]The mahameghasutra as  origin ofan interpolated Patt of the presentsuuarnaprabhosa, journl of indiiam ad bucdhist studies 845-1),tokyo, pp.2-0, suzuki,〓.[203]stipa worship and dharma evaluation in the suvarnaprabhasa, journal of indianad budchist studies 151-2),tokyo, pp.32-3, suzuki,t. [204]rites and buddhismaperspective from the sarasvati-parivarta in the suvarnaprabhusa, jjournal of indicn andbuddhist studties 12-2),tokyo, pp.12-17, suzuki,t. [2]the unchanged intentiorof the compilers of the suvarnaprabhasa:  examination through the verification of theHypothesis on "the independence of [Mahayana] buddhism," jjournal of indiam d buddhiststudies 1(53-2),tokyo, pp.20-26, suzuki, t. [2] the prinary introduction of the ritesfor good fortune into the sarnaprabosa described in the sri-parivarta, journalofindicn adbuddhist studties 1(4-3),tokyo,206,pp.42-50,suzuki, t. [7]intention of thecompilers of the suvarnaprubhasa expressed and intimated in the drdha-parivarta, jjournalofIndianad budhist studties 112(55-3),pp.64-72,and suzuki [1998a,1998c,1999,200a anc〓0bin japanese.2)<texts and abbreviations)〓suvarnaprabhasa or suvarna[-pra-] bhasottamasutrendrarajia.yuvc『金光明經』四卷,曇無識譯.t. no.663.suvs
lvs suvarnabhusottamosntro, ed. j. nobel, leipzig, 1937.Suvr
suvrphags p gser 'od ma mdo sde'i o'i rgyalpo ze bya ba theg pa chen poimdo, ery-suvarnaprabhasottamasutrendrardiia-numa-mahoyana-sutra, tr. unknown. p no176.
suvc2『合部金光明經』八卷,寶貴合〉.t. No.664.sr2phags pagser 'od dmpa mdo sde'i dhan po'i rgyalpozes bya ba theg pa chen po  mdo,arya-sunvarnaprabhosottamasutrendraroia-nama-mahoyana-sntra, tr. jinamitra, snlendrabodhiand ye ses sde. pno.175.sv『金光明最勝王經』十卷,義淨譯.t. no.665.suvrsuvarnaprabhosottamasutra, ed. J. nobel, leiden, 1944(T. taisho tripitaka,peking kanjur )The other notes had to be omitted for lack of space.(This research was partly supported by Japan society for the promotion of science, grant-in-Aid for scientific research (c),19520053,2007.)<key words)金光明最勝王経僧慎爾耶薬叉大将品,金光明経散脂鬼神品,〓
金光明経の編纂意図,〔大乗〕仏教の生き残り策としての金光明経.インド〔大乗〕仏教の実像理解.(professor, yamaguchi Prefectural university. d.litt.)
