The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSTwo paribhosas oantaraigaMas Shinobu
0.paniniyas resort to the concepts of antaraiga and bahiranga in order to determine theorderin which rules or operations provided for by them are to be applied. whatis regardedas antaranga applies in preference to what is regarded as bahiranga, which is provided forby two metarules (paribhosop) asiddham bahirangam antarunge and (bp)antaran-gam bahirangad butiyah.The former provides that when antaranga is to be appliedbahiranga has not been established, the latter that antaranga is stronger than bahiranga.of these the necessity of the latter is denied by patanjali and his claim is supported byNagesa. The aim of this paper is to make clear why patanjali denies the necessity ofbp.1.in the ninth varttika onp.1.4.2katyayana states the purpose of formulating bpas fol.lows.
"The punpose of formulating bp is to provide that yay substitution .77), replacing contigu-ous vowels with a single vowel (ekadesa) (.6.1.101),i substitution7.1100), and u substitu-tion.7.1.102) are respectively stronger than guna substitution7.3.86), vrddhi substitution(p.7.2.117), doubling (dippacana) .1.9), replacing a with zro (allopa)34),an operaion concerning an accent (svara ) (.8.2.4).let us consider the case of the derivation syona sun' in which the yad substitution by〓.6.1.77and the guna substitution byp.7.3apply.3,(1)〓*(3)s73.8*(3)〓736
〔2)〓.4.19(4)〓43)〓.1.77syonuFirst of all, the elements, the verb siv and the krt affix na, are introduced in the order(1)〓〓(2)a. after nhis substituted for v ofsivby4.19,the yy substitution and theguna substitutioncan apply simultaneously. the cause for the ynv substitution is iu of siu,while the cause for the guna substitution is the string in which na follows si.In this case the yd substitution is antaranga with respect to the guna substitution, since
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieStwo paribhosas on antaranga (S. Mase)the former has for its cause the contiguous vowels i and n which are located before na. ac-cording to katyayana, it is necessary to resott to bp, since in the given situation the ycdysubstitution and the guna substitution can apply simultaneously. by bp it is establishedthat the former applies in preference to the latter2.In the bhasya on vt.21ad p.1.4.2, however, patanjali adduces an instance in whichBPis not taken into consideration.4)consider the derivation of pacavedam 'let us twccook this' (pacava idam).(1)(pac〓m.3.3.162(2)(pccs)m78
-〓〓im.349
〓im.34
(3)(pc〓〓im499〓
(4)(pacim3.685)(pacim73101(6)pacovedcmt.187P.3.4.93
(7) pacavaidam4.93pucavedam
at stage (6),by p.6.187the final vowel a of pacova and the following voweliof idmare both replaced by the guna vowel e, so that we have pacavedum. after this string ob-tains, the substitution of the vrddhi vowel ai for e can apply, because this e can be treatedas the final vowel of pacave and as the initial vowel of idam. but this vrddhi substitutiondoes not apply. the feason for this is as follows:The utterance in question consists of the words (pada) pacana and idam. the itempa-cava, after being derived, is construed with the item idcm. the elements of pacaya arentroduced in the order()p〓2)〓(3)〓p. the guna substitution has, for itscause, iof idcm, while the vrddhi substitution has, for its cause, e of ve (vs).accordingly,the vrddhi substitution is antaranga with respect to the guna substitution, since the causefor the vrddhi substitution is introduced earlier than the cause for the guna substitution.According to ap, it is proper to say that when the vrddhi substitution is to apply, the gunasubstitution has not been established. in other words, ap determines the order in which thevrddhi substitution first applies and then the guna substitution. therefore, on the basis ofap, one should block the application of the vrddhi substitution in the order in which theguna substitution first applies and then the vrddhi substitution.what does it mean that one cannot block the application of the vrddhi substitution on
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiesthe basis of baccording to nagesa, bp is the meta-rule which provides that when twooperations characterized as antaranga and bahiranga would obtain simultaneously, theoperation characterized as antaranga takes place earlier. in the given situation the gunasubstitution and vrddhi substitution would not obtain simultaneously. consequently, bpdoes not have to be taken into consideration here.3.as said, patanjali denies the necessity of bp. with reference to the derivation ofsyona, he states that by ap the yan substitution, which is antaranga, applies in preferenceto the guna substitution. this shows that Patanjali holds that ap is in force even whenantaranga and bahiranga are assumed to apply simultaneously. it is important to note inthis connection that nagesa explains what apis, as follows:"when antaranga is to take effect, the bahiranga has not been established which has already ariseniata) or which would obtain simultaneously with it tatklapraptika)."4.let us next examine what it means that two operations apply simultaneously. con-sider the derivation of vrscati ( he cuts'; vrasc, 3rd sg. pres. p.), with reference to whichNagesa says the following."In the word-formation view (padasamskarapaksa), it is to be understood that both the deletion ofvby p.6.1.66and the samprasarana substitutionbyp.6.1.14apply simultaneously."8in the word-formation view the derivationin question is as follows(1)vrasc(3)yrsc.6.1.108(2)vrasc.6.1.16vrscatik(2)rasci.6.1.66To explain. at stage (2)the deletion of v of the verb wrasc, which is provided forp6.1.66, the samprasarana substitution for rof vrasc can apply simultaneously. in this casethe deletion of v, which has for its cause both vand r of the verb vrasc introduced earlier,is antaraniga with respect to the samprasarana substitution, which has for its cause sa laterintroduced after the verb vrasc.9) by showing the derivation of vrscatiunder the method ofkramenanvakhyana 'step-by-step explanation', it will be clearly seen in what order the el-ement which serves as the cause for the deletionofvnd the one which serves as the causefor the samprasarana substitution are introduced.
The  uapanese sSOciation ofIndian and buddhiststudies(1)vrasc(4) vrasc.3.1.77(2)rsc.6.1.66(5)vrasc〓i.6.1.16(2)vrasc.3.2.123(6)vrsc〓i.6.1.10(3)vrascip..4.78rscatiitis important to note here that when operations aad bcan apply simultaneously, evenif their causes are concurrently present, it comes to mind that the elements which serve asthe causes have been introduced in a certain order. itis ap which provides that anturanggand bahiranga should apply in the order. Thus, in the case of syona also, we may say thefollowing. it is established byap that the yn substitution whose cause is the element siilwhich is introduced earlier than the element na serving as the cause for the guna substitu-tion, being antaraniga, applies in preference to the guna substitution, since it comes tomind that siu has been introduced earlier than ma.5.pataniali, who denies the necessity of bp, argues that ap is effective even where an.taranga and bahiranga cn apply simultaneously. according to nagesa, which of two operations is antaranga is to be determnined by which of the two causes of the two operationshas been introduced earlier than the other, even where they can apply simultaneously, onemust distinguish the fact that their causes are concurrently present, fromn the fact that theelements which serve as the causes have been introduced in a certain order, not simultane-ously. even where two operations a and b can apply simultaneously, if opefationcomesto mind because the element serving as its cause has been introduced earlier than the ele-ment for operation b, it can be established on the basis ofap that a applies in preferenceto b. For. whenis to take effect, the application of b has not yet been established.(abbreviations)mbh. the vuakarana-mahabhasya of Pataniali, 3vol. ed. by f. kielhotn.fourth edition by abhyankar k. v. (poona: bhandarkar oriental research institute, 196-72).ud-yota: mahabhasyapradipoddyota by nagesa, bvol. ed. by vedavrata. (gurukula jhajjar (rohatak)laryana sahitya samsthana).pis: the paribhasendusekhara editedby abhyankar cpoona: b.o.r.〓.1962).vts katyayana's varttika. see mbh. Mase201a study of paribhusendusekhara 5asiddham bahirangam antarange (amnais of the research project center for the comparativestudy oflogic 389-99).1)what is meant by vt. 8op.1.4.2antarangam cis bp. another formulation of bpis antar-angabahirangayor antarangam balovo (purusottamadeva)
The japanese association of indian and buddhist studies)v9onp.1.42propoionm anekideseotamn guaddhidimcmilpasyrehy3) mbhonp.1.4.2.06.14-15)gmad yanades /syonah syondgunas ca prepnoti yan-〓desas cafparatad gmch sya yanadeso bhaaty antoigat4)Mbh on p.1.42.310.1-2) km prayoinem pacedm padmem asanad h-irongalksamaya gunasyamrngalakanam aium ma bhidii/5)uddpota on mbh ad.14.(5.22-23boironge kre ii aym hi myo yugarpriepiy anreigasa prahamamproytiboihaka evet bhaya6)eh n p.14.2.10.2-4) bhe arhi karaye net iha anyiy sidp〓 vonn sporepy saad bhirenigltsanasma guasyamaroigalsano janadeso bhasyati /
7)pis (84.1) antroige kartaye jiim takilpriopikm c bongam asdham iyarthch
〓)rs (822) vscapitisu padsanskairopoise samanakilaam e dwor i boym〓roilha stage/2) the deletion of vof the vebrascdoes not apply by vie of the auhor-i〓yoffthe dhatupata, wherethevetis listed as omsci see mase[20061.(Key words) nagesa, paribhasendusekhara, paribhasa,amtraiga(Graduate student, hiroshima university)
