The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSThe Symbolism of hokke-proper (〓a biocentric drama upon the stage in the middle-heaven(Kotani Yukio
The preceding presentation ended with the first half of the chapter of the appearance of60,000bodhisattvas from the earth. climax of the lotus sutra-proper. this one beginswith its second half. which plays an intermediate role between its first half and the nextchapter, <The measuring of merits of tathagata>, which has been indeed traditionallyconsidered, because of the characteristic ofits eternal and absolute Reality, as a main point,and which works howevef here in the hokk-roper, according to our private scholar,Tominaga, only as aftereffects ofits preceding chapter.1.〓nTEREZz0
The extracted passage of the second half is as followed: maitreya, who has never seenanyone of the innumerable akasa-bodhisattvas, asks sakyamuni mysterious questionsand also wants to know their identity. 〓how has the tathagata, within so short a time,been able to rouse and bring to maturity for supreme, perfect enlightenment this hostof bodhisattvas, this multitude of bodhisattvas, a multitude so great that it would bempossible to count the whole of it, even if one were to continue counting for hundredthousands of myriads of kotis of ons?..it is just as if some man, young and youthful,a young man with black hair and in the prime of youth, twenty-five years of age, wouldrepresent centenarians as his sons, and say: 'here, young men of good family, you seemy sons, 'and if those centenariats would declare: 〓This is the father who begot us'.2(trsl. by h. kemn)1)after the question about their birthplace, which was not cited here, thisone is raised. it symbolises the impossibility of understanding, with a generally empiricalcommonsense and intelligence, the bodhisattvas fron the gaps of the earth. who areextraordinary both in quality and quantity. The answer to this question is given in the nextchapter. consequently this passage plays a role as a sort of connector, continuing from thefore and to the rear. contrary to traditional interpretations, tominaga called the first part
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesof the chapter, <bodhisattvas's gushing out of the earth〓 a root, and the next chapter abranch, an explanation of the working ofacomplete samskara2.MaSuRINgaGa'SDuRaIoolIEThereupon the bhagavat informed all the bodhisattvas to listen to him attentively andto believe in his words. Then they, with maitreya at their head. stretched out the ioinedhands, saying to him, "expound this matter, o sugata, we will believe in the word of theTathagata )."(ibid.) the bhagavat, considering their earnest entreaty, which was repeatedthree times, addressed them thus: " listen then, good bhiksus, attentively, as we manifesta vital working of our experience of human self-awakening (mamadhisthana-baladhanam)."In order to make conspicuous this novel interpretation of the extractor of hokke-proper,Tominaga's, letus quote again the translation of the aforementioned h. kern, which beginswith the following opening phrase, (or "the power of supremacy which forms my attribute",retranslating these sanskrit words on footnote)…the force of a strong resolve which1assumed is such, young men of good family, that this world, including gods, men, ancdemons, acknowledges: now has the lord sakyamuni, after going out from the home ofthe sakyas, arrived at supreme, perfect enlightenment, on the summit of the terrace ofenlightenment at the town of gaya. but, .. the truth is that many hundred thousand myriadsof kotis of ons ago ihave arrived at supreme, perfect enlightenment. by way of example…let there be the atoms of earth of fifty hundred thousand myriads of kotis of worlds, letthere exist some man who takes one of those atoms of dust and then goes in a easterrdirection fifty hundred thousand myriads of kotis of worlds further on, there to depositthat atom of dust, let in this manner the man catry away from all those worlds the wholemass of earth, and in the same manner, and by the same act as supposed, deposit all thoseatomns ina eastern ditection. now, would you think,… that any one should be able toimagine, weigh, count, or determine (the number of) those worlds?",8)if the sanskrit word<adhisthanabala〓(如來秘密神通之力,什譯)is a mahayana-likely annexed example, itproves to be at effectuation of<reality-view, which composes a mystical metaphysics.According to t'ien-t'ai theoty, in case of the opposition of a noumenal sense symbolisedby oneness and phenomenal ones (Threeness), the former hides by dint ofthe latter behindthem, while the phenomena reduce themselves, disappearing to the substance (al-in-oneness). cf. anesaki's remark of tendai's theory as "trinity of buddhism'.)
The  uTapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhiStStudieswhy could the author of hokke-proper manage to bring out this uncognisable? in hiscase. he made himself an actual verification of his complete working of samskara, themental aggregate of formation as axis of five skandha. he abandoned the metaphysicalstandpoint presupposing abstract existences, in which the substance is thoroughlyunconceivable and one tries to grasp through conscious conceptualisations only vacantshadows. The above-mentioned <adhisthanabala〓 represents for tominaga the profoundeststandpoint of buddha, and corresponds to the most important key-words in the precedingchapter of <apparition of,00bodhisattvasrddhyabhisamskara〓(<佛神力〉,什譯,;"transcendental power", trsl.by h.ketn) which for him, as mentioned before, "thevery completion of samskara'. if we paraphrase this chinese word of<神通〓to<料神の融通無碍>5),it holds true to an another meaningof <kalpa〓 a a competent andractical ability, than that which is commonly interpreted as enormously long span oftime. otherwise, this word of<神通>means only a supernaturally magical power. onekalpa contains both a deposited point (<vijnana>, consciousness ) and non-deposited space〔<samskara〓, unconsciousness).a series of our iudgements and deeds, as fruits of our mentalworking five <skandha>, <samskara〓 as its axis, develops complicatedly and innumerousleven in one minute. The <Measuring of tathagata's ayus〓sists in describingquantitatively buddhist phenomena of a man's five cskandha>, of which samskara〓(composing power) works perfectly. admitting that the vigour of the <skandha, especially〓samskara tesulting from the illusion, has been traditionally a ringleader of causing thebiggest one of the eight pains, what a radical evaluation, to use a nietzsche's word of<Umwertung〓(transvaluation), for the <samskara>, ifonly it is rightly operatedl.The original word of the above-mentioned "some man' is <purusa>, which makes usremember, coupled with the "atoms of dust"(<prakriti〓), that its souce is the Samkhya-hilosophy based on dualism, in which the deposit or femoval of the latter signifies thepurification of the former. botrowing the ideas fromm the 60 tantras in the older svstem ofthis philosophy, as in the preceding chapter, the author of hokke-proper expresses thestandard-unit of five <skandha〓's working of real human-beings, explains theoreticallythe range of a tathagata-like potentiality, by adopting as a prosaic expression the temporalform and rearranging it into the spatial, as the phenomena occur on both poles, and that, forconvenience's sake, for past facts. The quoted phrase of 'inan eastern direction' concernsthe direction to the past, since the east is, according to the indian correspondence of time
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesand space, the past, as concerning a word <purva> mentioned later. The true value of thehokke-proper consists in the next critical adaptation of the samkhya theory: while thelatter handled mental phenomena only in the process of consciousness, symbolised by thedeposit of the atoms of dust, the former took both the particles of the lands deposited andthose of the lands not deposited (unconsciousness) into consideration. The very activity ofsamskara of human being goes on in the vety process ofunconsciousness.By the way, the german indologist, h. oldenberg translated this Sanskrit wordinto <Gestaltung〓. (composing power), while our tominaga compared this word with<nothigenanlagenecessary device) in the last goethe's letter to w. v. humboldt. in thepsychological explanation of a human unconscious working.' in this respect Mr.hokk(fa-hua)'s criticism or correction of the general tendency common to the mankindrepresented by the samkhya-philosopohy and buddhist viinanavadin, that the consciousjudgement (dhamma) is all the mental phenomena is a very important indication. thecolossal length of time, familiar to the indian myth, corresponds to the aforementionedinnumerable 〓kalpas>, which are applied to one's continuingly intermittent thinkings ancjudgements in one day. here let us continue the previous translation by ken: "The lordhaving thus spoken, the bodhisatva mahasattva Maitreya and entire host of bodhisattvasreplied: they are incalculable, o lord, those worlds, countless, beyond the range ofthought. not even all the disciples and pratyekabuddhas, o, lord, with theit arya-knowledge, will be able to imagine, weigh, count or detetmine them..."8The tathagatha who so long ago was perfectly enlightened is unlimited in the durationof his life. he is everlasting."9according to tominaga, the true motive of this very chapter of<Measuring of tathagata'sayusonsists in preaching not the eternal past for nothing, but the rationale, inconformity which man can be, being always based on the present, constantin his rightway through his long career. the next paragraph has not been interpreted correctly, inspite of the main point of this chapter: "and even now adyapi)., ihave not accomplishedmy ancient (paurviki) bodhisattva- course, and the measure of my lifetime is not full..…Nay,. i shall yet (adyapi) have twice as (tad dvi gunena) many hundred thousand myniadsof kotis of eons before my lifetime be full.10trsl. by kern) tominaga criticised thsfootnote of kern's interpretation as the original use of the word "twice' shows, itmust, inthis case, mean necessarily twice.11the next citation is the very footnote by the translator
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studieshimself : "virtually he has existed from the very beginning, from an infinite period;infinitely multiplied by two remains infinity."12)this proof is utter nonsense for theinterpretation of this case, The metaphysically common sense is liable to fall into this sortof mistake. after all. this is nothing but the demonstration of eteinity. in order to prove theinfinity, it is not always necessary to be twice. it is true oftriple, quadruple. in the hokke-proper the expression, that itmust be 'only by twice' by all means, was made.and the. number of fifty thousand myriads of kotis, which is cited in the hokke-properand which shows an allusion to five elements of samkhya-philosophy and to five skandhaof sakya's preaching, seems indeed to mean an infinity, but the author set up really, whileborrowing the idea from the samkhya theoty. the mental sphere ofhuman phenomena, lestone should regard it easy-going as infinity, the cadyapi〓(just now), repeated two times irthis passage, shows that the present, not the past, is the core of this problem.Next, as for the <paurviki〓, adiective formo <purva>, signifies, spatially used 〓beingbefore or in front", azimuthally 〓eastern', temporally "former, prior", as a noun, 〓anancestor, ancients . it was this very word that Kumaraiiva translated into chinese as<本>(primordiality), that caused in latet ages various metaphysically arbitrary interpretations bychinese and Japanese scholars and the development of the theoty of<本覺>(primordia.enlightenment))at any rate the word <purva〓 designates an original exercise forbodhisattvaessence of enlightenment), ie. a matured completion of samskara. to expresseven 'a little while ago', the <purvais enough. Furthermore, the same translator promotedthis idealistically absolute tendency by the word <cra>. going back to the precedingchapter of<bodhisattvas' Gushing out of the earth, two lines verses toward its etd runs follows: "evam ciram prapta maya 'gra-bodhi aripacitas caiti mayaiva sarve.""verilyI have reached superior enlightenment, and it is by me alone that all have been broughto maturity." trsl. by kem)14)In this english translation the relevant part of the originalphrase of <evam ciamis missing. The chinese translationis<從久遠來〓.according totoninaga, this rendering is excessive, since ccaeans, as it says in the dictionaty, 〓solong, lasting a long time', and <evam ciramexisting so long' .as the problem concernsitself with the questionof maitreya: "in what way has the bhagavat brought up so able andso many bodhisattvas in such a short period of forty years? ",the answer of 'since eternity'is much too developed to be the solution, unless it is entrusted to metaphysics. Thus astandard-unit in the activities of the human five skandha is in outline expressed. Such a
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist studies)the symbolism of hokke-proper (〓)(y. kotani.unthinkable and unlimited times repeated revolution of five skandha's cycle is treated ashuman phenomena with the interpretation of its potentiality in the sphere concerned. the<ayus>, the duration of life or, in this case, innumerously accumulated cognitions andjudgements, accomplished byrddhy-abhisamskara> complete working of samskara), hassuch a high numbers of <kalpas>, and is not only inexhaustible even now, but has in thefuture just twice the ayus-kalpas<復倍上數〓.3.HcoMISSIo
The last chapter is named <anuparindana>, which means 'given over' or commissioned'.and it consists in manifesting to the assembly what the crddhyabhisamskara> is, . thatis to say, is nothing but the indications, that each bhiksu should, after his death, bringhis virtuous preachings into full play. In short it is a license. at sakyamuni's death,all his works are going to end. The disciples have nothing left to do but to put hiscommission into operation. sakyamuni rose from his dhatma-seat, and having taken allthe bodhisattvas" right hands en bloc, with his right(able) hand, which had becomecompetent through the accomplished working of samskara, spoke on that occasion, asfollows: "Ye bhiksus, we'll give over to each of ye this Saddharma pundarika dharma-paryaya." So addressed by the bhagavat sakyamuni, all the tathagatas, having been deeplymoved with a great joy and conscious of the importance of things, consented with onevoice to his instructions. Thereupon the bhagavat Sakyamuni dismissed all the tathagatas,who had come to the assembly from other worlds, appreciating their services and wishingthem a happy existence. and he repeated the same deed to the tathagata prabhutaratna,nd made that stupa retumn to the former subterranean placel5)4.ePlUe
Lastly we quote two views on the lotus-sutra in the english language, and characteriseour main subjects in a complementary style, by comparing the former to the latter.〓)"the saddharmapundarika bears the character of a dramatic performance, anundeveloped mystery play, in which the chief interlocutor, not the only one, is sakyamuni,the lord. it consists of a series of dialogues, brightened by the magic effects of a would-be supernatural scenery. The phantasmagorical parts of the whole are as clearly intendedto impress us with the idea of the might and glory of the buddha, as his speeches are to set
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesforth his all-surpassing wisdom." (H. kem)6.〓)"the lotus oftruth.. may be called the johannine gospel of buddhism. it tries to solvethe problems of reality by the key given in the identification of buddha's enlightenmentwith cosmic trnuth." (m.anesaki)17)various scenes, modified by the four adjectives of the view i)"mystery', "magic'"supetnatural' and "phantasmagorical', such as sudden apparition of the stupa, sabda'semitting, simultaneous sitting of double-imaged two buddhas, thundering cry and issuingof the0,0 bodhisattvas, etc. develop like a kaleidoscope. The aim of our main subiectsconsists in elucidating the svmbolism of this <extraordinarydrama. al is ascribableto 〓allsurpassing wisdom' of the hero, to the prominent ability of the original author,who had an excellent command of his native sources, and to that of our private scholar,Tominaga, who could extract, onthe basis of Goethe's motphology, over a more than0years' barrier, the original form from the extant lotus-sutra, of which whole context wasthrown into disorder through many annexed admixtures. in this connection our epithet of<extraordinaryorresponds to a Japanese phrase<奇想天外〓.The Chinese characterof<奇〓is usually used indeed to express strangeness or queerness. but this charactemanifests, as one can see with half an eye, the combination of<大〓(greatly) and<可〓(good), different from the japanese examination markscpassable. consequently the<奇>signifies also "wonderful' and 'excellent'. it is precisely extra(非)-ordinary(凡).thesecond citation (ii) is from the appendix i. tendai's doctrines of the middle path andReality of m. anesaki's " nichiren, the budchis prophef". the following passage refersto the details, how tendai (t'ien-t'ai),named chi-ki developed, under the influence ofNagarjuna, from the middle path of vacuity, his speculation dialectically and establishedhis Reality-view: "tendai buddhism's chief aim was to achieve a higher synthesis of theexternal -realism of materialistic tendency and the acosmism of transcendental extreme. itfurther elaborated the theoty ofreality along the line of the thought, and on the basis of thelotus of truth."18)in passing, the subtitle of our study: the <middle heaven>vaihayasa : suspendded in theair) symbolises a conplete freedon both from the celestial transcendental idealism ofmetaphysics and fron the tetrestrial materialism of struggling egoism. in short. it is nota question of the dialectical <aufheben>, where it arises from the opposing conceptionsa would-be <synthesis fruit of cerebral play through the amopua-like cessation of
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesthinking with an aspiring gemuit (feeling) for an idealised postulat (request), but an<erlebte einheit〓enlivened unity), and our hokke-proper demonstrates that with itsconcrete symbolisms. The <Removal of two piecespposing conceptions)of the stupa'sgate bears through their thoroughgoingness a living experience of <al-in-oney. by doingaway with both idealism and materialism en bloc under an epithet of <logozentrisch>(logocentric), l.klages produced the fruits of his biocentric>science one after another.it had nothing to do with the <aufheben. iconnection with the "relation to betweenthe individual and the world' and with the above-cited "the identification of buddha'senlightenment with cosmic truth', anesaki referred to the teaching of the <Ekayaa>onevehicle) of the lotus of truth. "it means the one and the same way for all the tathagatas ofthe past, present and the future. itis the way, and at the same time the ideal-the way tcrealize the truth ofuniversal communion. and the ideal to be reached by that way."19The problem of<一>(primordial unity) in the young tominaga's case was, how heshould behave, both as a man in the middle of the universe and as a Japanese national, inorder to demonstrate his unified personality. aclue to the solution was the motto of<徳一,tei>from the shuking at the final part ofthe edtictucation by the meiji-Emperor,the true meaning of which has neither been fully correctly understood, even now, nothas it been put into practice on the nationwide level. additionally, the cEkayaa〓 of theLotus-sutra, two sources pregnant with profound meaning, gave hinn the pertinent hints.〓oneness>of confucius, with which he practiced a consistency of his way, and <onecause> of shotoku-prince, which he could manage to make out, by taking million meritfrom outside. in his later days, tominaga discovered the goethe's word <eine einheit〓 inthe above-mentioned goethe's last letter  referring to the <nothigennlagen>, whichhe regarded as synonym with <samskara〓. this german word signifying <unityisin thefollowing context: an excellent genius produces his masterpiece out of the cooperation ofconsciousness and unconsciousness, which works like watp and weft ina pattern, so thatit strikes the world dumb. its motive power is the very <eine einheit〓, which tominagatranslated into the very<奇〓(a great wonder). Masaharu anesaki , as a famous scholar ofcomparative religion, left many accomplishments on christian martyrdoms in japan. hisother mention refers to "the johannine gospel of buddhism', which is under the influenceof Gnosis. gnosis is a christian heresy and famous for its mystic and occult character.The opening phrase of the Gospel tuns : "in the beginning was the <loos." the hero of
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesGoethe's faust translated it, after painstaking efforts, into the <Tat〓(deed). Getting scentof a shadow of the kant's practical reason, tominaga found a true ground of this greatdrama's subtitle: the <tragey1)sacred books of the east, editedby max muller, vol21,the saddharmapundarika or the lo-us of the true lw(以下lTL) translated byh. kern/ reprinted by motilal banarsidass/delhi,1980p.294ff.
2)ibid. p.2983)ibid. p.298f4)masaharu anesaki: nichiren, fhe budchitrophef(以下anesaki)apndixi the fun-damental tenets of buddhism concerning reality, repr. by harvard univ. press19p.145)雜誌『一』(富永先生の會・昭和12～19年)法華(終回):第46號5頁～6)富永半次郎著/大野達之助・千谷七郎・風間敏夫ほか編『蓮華展方一原述作者の法華經(梵和對譯)」(昭和27年)22頁右7)富永半次郎著・千谷七郎編『釋迦佛陀本紀余論』(其の一)(昭和29年)62頁8)lTLp.299～3029)lTLp.02
10)ibid.
11)前記『一同號13頁以下12)lTLp.302脚註13)前記『ー』同號13頁14)lTLp.293
15)前記『ー』同號14頁.ibid.20頁以下16)lTLp.ixf.
17)anesaki. p.14818)ibid.
19)anesaki, p.14620)〓出goethes bnief an wilhelm v. humboldt(17. marz,1832)21)富永半次郎『正覺に就いて一釋尊の佛教』(本著作と同名の刊行會・昭和59年)127～163頁,及び小谷幸雄「佛陀現象?-ゲーテ『ファウスト』の謎一富永半次郎の比較〈文明〓論的業績-(序説)」立正大学大学院紀要・第17号平成13年(keywords) rddy-abhisamnskara, ayus-pramnana, adhisthana-bala, kalpa, tad-dvi-gunena(ptofessor emeritus, rissho university)
