The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudiesdoes the newly discovered shou yi ing originatefroman indian-language text or not?HunG hung-lungIntroduction
The following research paper will present further analysis of the kongo-ji anbun shonpyijing, a manuscript that was recently discovered in999,which has been confirmed to bea work of an Shigao(安世高).following conventions, this manuscript will be hereafterreferred to as k-aSYj. The k-aSYj most likely is an authentic manuscript, as it is verclosely relatedto foshuo d ambcm shoupi jing佛説大安般守意經t602(hereafter referredto as 〓-asY) and xiuxing dodi jigshuxi pin修行道地經t606數息品=panachap. of xxddj (hereafter referred to as xxddc.however, there is a maior questionas to whether the k-asYj was derived foma pali or sanskrit script, or was it created bya later author drawing from different sources? in this paper i shall attempt to answer thisquestion.
both the k-aSYj and the xxdd are very similar in content and in their uise ofterminology, and strikingly correspond with the terminology of the sattatimsa bodhipak-khika dhamma三十七品經法,the Thirty-seven practices for the attainment of Enlight-enment. These37practices include cattaro satipatthana四意止( the four bases of mindful-ness), cattaro ammappadhana四意断( the four proper exertions), cattaro iddhipada四神足(the four supernatural powers). panca indrivani五根( the five roots).paica balani五力(the five powers), Satta boihanga七覺意(the seven Factors of enlightenment) and attangikoMaggo八行(the eight-fold noble path).In this paper, i will also compare k-aSYj and xxdd-ac with Samatha vipassana止觀(concentration and observation) and cattaro ariyasaccani四諦(the Four noble truths).
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhistStudies(138)does the newly discovered shou i ing originate from an indian-anguage textor Not? h. hung)The text referring to cattaro satipatthana in the xXddcis very short and concise:qi xi xing zhe dang zhi lico zhi, se qi mie chu tong yamg,fa yi, gumqi mie ben ch qiyinyuan, guoqu dng lai xing wu yanding其修行者當知了之。色起滅處痛痒法意。觀起滅本察其因縁。過去當來行無願定1).comparing the content refemring to the cattaro sati-patthana of the xxdd-ac and the k-aSYj, the latter is extremely lengthy. The contentin the k-ASYj is composed of one summary sentence and twelve individual sentences4,which are derived froma combination of the four kinds of Satipatthana and three kinds ofsamadhi:
Four kinds of Satipatthanathree kinds of samadhi内外身身觀止空定向活
内外痛療痛療觀止不願定向活内外意意觀止不(思)想定向活内外法法觀止
The four steps of cattaro satipatthana are aiihattabahiddha kaye kayanupassi viharati,aijihattabahiddha vedanasu vedanasupassi viharati, ajjhattabahiddha cite cittanupassiviharati and aiihattabahiddha dhammesu dhammanupassi viharati. The three kinds ofsamadhi are the samadhi of emptiness(空定),the samadhi of aimlessness(無願定)andthe samadhi of no-form(無相定).it is most likely a Shigao himself who created thiscombination, and depicted it in the twelve sentences appearing in the k-aSYJ. however,according to dapiposha lun大毘婆沙論8),within the samadhi of emptiness and the sa-madhi of aimlessness, each of the four contemplations of cattaro satipatthana are active.Yet, within the samadhi of no-form there is only the activity of the contemplation ofdhammesu. dhammanupassi viharati(法念住).therefore, i believe that this was a mis-nterpretation by an Shigao, as the xxdd-ac does not inchude the content as indicatedby an Shigao in k-aSYJ. This shows that the paragraph in cattaro satipatthana that anShigao wrote was not in the original pali or sanskrit sources.cattaro Sammappadhanawe can compare the contents of both cattaro sammappadhana in k-asYj and Xx-dd).there are some differences in the terminology, but the meaning is almost thesame in these two texts.K-asYxXdd-c
①未生弊悪意法。不復生-〓〓未起悪法。則不復生
The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiStStudieSdoes the newly discovered hon ni jing originate from an indian-language text or not? (h. hung)(139②已生弊悪意法。即舎→〓諸惡自盡③未生清淨法。即生〓〓未起法念。當使興發②已生弊悪意法。即舎
③未生清淨法。即生
④已生清淨法。便増多有生
4已生清淨法。便増多有生→①所興善法。令具足cattaro idhipadaCattaro idhipada means the four steps of samadhi, chandasamadhi(欲定),viriyasama-dhi(精進定),cittasamadhi(意定)and vimamsasamadhi(思惟定).The interpretations of cattaro idhipada in k-asYj9 are shown in a more detailed formulein each of the "supernatural powers"" than they arein Xxdd-.but the first part ofCattaro satipatthana, chandasamadhi, contains a more precise explanation in xxddj.〓c1)thanin k-asY).the content of both texts are as shown below.K-asY
xxddac
①如應欲得。〓〓心已如是隨其所欲。②是名爲欲。
〓〓是謂自恣。
③從是欲,所生念一心。
〓〓令志專一。
④是名爲定。
〓①是謂自在定意。
⑤彼如是應行相連不中止。→〓從是次第⑥有信,有精進,有念,有定,有慧。〓〓信,念,精進,觀察護命。⑦名爲斷生死。
〓〓是謂為信。思惟其行。
⑧故説欲定斷生死隨行成神足〓①是謂自恣三味專精手道而獲神足k-asYjxxdd-c
②是名爲欲。〓〓是謂自恣。④是名爲定。-①是謂自在定意。oncomparing the usage of termninologies in the two paragraphs, we can see that the term②u欲(chanda) corresponds to 〓zzi自恣,③niom yi xin念一心corresponds toC〓izhum yi志專一,and⑤xiamg licmzhong  hi相連不中止corresponds to 〓cidi次第13)
But what is the relationship between欲定(chandasamadhi) and 信inxxddThere is very little explanation in the Tripitaka, but we can find the term cattaro idhipadanits original sanskrit text " Sravakabhumi14)", in the paragraph shown below:(1)chanda-samadhi-prahana-samskara-samanvagatasya rddhipadasya,(2)sraddha-virya-citta-mimansa-samadhi-prahana-samskara-samanvagatasya rddhipadasya,(3)virya-citta-mimansa-samadhi-pradhana-samskara-samanvagatasya rddhipadasyaXua ang玄奘translated only the following paragraph into chinese:「四神足者。一欲三摩地斷行成就神足。二勤三摩地斷行成就神足。心三摩地斷行成就神足。四觀三摩地斷行成就神足。」(『聲聞地』t3.42-5)This paragraph in the chinese translation corresponds only to the original sanskrit sen-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies(140) does the newly discovered n sho f jing originate from an lndian-language textor not? h.hung)lences)and(3),as he didnot translate sentence (2)into chinese. but sentence (2)containsa very important meaning. Sentence (2) is almost the same as sentence(3), except that ithas the prefix "sraddha,"" which means xin信(faith). The sentence (2)has the grammaticalusage of tatpurusa in sansktit. prefix"sraddha" in this sentence keeps the instrument cswith virya". The meaning of sentence (2)is almost the same as the(〓gof XXddacThe meaning is that when the practitioner has completed his first step of cattaro iddhipada-chanda-samadhi-prahana-samskara-samanvagatasya rddhipadasya, although he has notyet completed the other three stepsvitya-citta-mimansa-samadhi-pradhana-samskara-samanvagatasya rddhipadasya, he nevertheless will have had gained the faith to completethe three other steps. So the explanation of chandasamadhiis more precise inxxdd-acthan itis ink-aSYj.Panca indrivaniK-aSYjxxdd
①彼如有諦。信。信者不離信意生。是生意能得隨分別可。念可。可。是名爲信根。②身亦念攝持。是名爲精進根〓②己獲神足是謂信根
〓〓身心堅固。謂精進根
〓〓所可思法。是為意根
〓①其心專一。是謂定根
〓〓能分別法而知所趣。是謂智慧根③意生不忘諦。是名爲念根
④一心向行。是名爲定根
⑤觀。是名爲慧根
The three terms ①si fen bie ke隨分別可,nio ke念可,ke可make up the faithroot. they are the same terms as wei sui ke微隨可15),zhong xiamg sui ke中相隨可16),and sui ming wei ke隨名爲可1tink-asYJ. and they are the outcome of practicing nuen暖xding頂ren忍,the former three steps of the四善根(four good roots). These threesteps, retain the same meaning, and are subdivided into nine steps inxxd).thetetm②shen yi mian身亦念is parallel to 〓hen xin身心ixxd-c. The term③d諦means四諦(four noble truths). it parallels the dfa法kixxddj-ac. the fmeans "dhammanupassi viharati", contemplating things in general as devoid of inherentexistence. So the term ti is parallel to the term fa. the term①yixin kiag一心向has theame meaning as一向念19)in yinchru jing陰持入經(hereafterycrj), and its original palitermipetakopades is "ekaggam cittassa". and d the term qizham yi其心專-is a special termin several works of Zhu fahu竺法護.so the term yi xn xiang parallelsthe termqi xzhucn yi.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhistStudiesdoes the newly discovered b shou f fing originate fom an lndian-language textor not2 h. huno)(141)Paica balani
K-yjxxddj2)
K-asyj1
xXddj-ac2)
①信。不信不能得壊信。是名爲信力〓③其信温和是謂信力
②精進。不精進不能得壊精進。是名爲精進力。〓〓進力〓〓精進力
→〓精進力
③念意。感意23)不能得壊念意。是名爲念力。〓〓意力〓〓意力
〓〓意力
④定意。感意不能得壊定意。是名爲定力。〓①寂意力
〓①寂意力
⑤智慧。不慧不能得壊智慧。是名爲慧力。〓〓智慧力
The use of terminologies of panca balani in k-asYJ are almost parallels to that in〓Xddj-ac. although the sentences in k-asYj are longer than thosein xxddj-c, thedescriptions are reasonable24)Satta boiihangaK-asYjxxdd-c
K-aSYJ
①念不忘。是爲念覺種意。
〓①能及諸法。則心覺意
②觀。是名擇法覺種意。
〓〓分別諸法。是謂擇求諸法覺意③身行亦所念得攝。是名爲精進覺種意〓⑥心堅固是謂精進覺意
④從諦足喜。是名爲喜覺種意〓d心懐喜踊得如所欲。是謂欣悦覺意⑤身亦然已念止。是爲止覺種意〓〓身意相依信柔不亂是謂信覺意⑥一向念。是名爲定覺種意
〓①其心一寂。是謂定覺意
⑦意隨願得觀。是名爲觀覺種意〓⑨其心見滅姪怒癡垢所志如願。是護覺意The zhongyi種意is a term rarely usedin shigao's works. but we can see the term,niam jue zhong yi念覺種意in the notes of Yc). the term hu jue yi護覺意inxxd-〓c,not only exists in many works of Zhu Fahu, but also exists in several works ofaShigao. we can also discover its original pali term, upekkhasambojhangopetako-padesa. we find that Zhu Fahu follows the terminological usage ofan Shigao. the term〓n jueyi信覺意is a special term translatedby zhu Fahu only to conclude, we can s.that the terminological usage of satta boiihanga in these two texts are parallel to each other.atthangiko maggoK-aSYjx〓dd-acK-aSYJ
①觀。是名爲直見。
②至誠計。是名爲直行正計。③直身亦念攝制。是名爲正方便治。〓〓設使別觀諸法之義。是謂正見。〓〓諸所思惟無邪之願。是為正念。〓〓身意堅固。是為正方便。
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies142)does the newly discovered shon ii fing originate from an indian-language textor not? h. hung)④直意生念不斷。是名爲直正念意。〓①心向經義。是為正意。
〓d心向經義。是為正意
⑤直行一向念。是名爲正定。〓〓其心專一。是為正定。
The meaning of the three pairs, ①〓,③〓,⑤〓,in these two texts are very similartceach other, as they are just like panicindriyani. although the usage of the tenminologiesdiffer between the two authors, we can say that the content of these two paragraphs paral-lel each other. except for the above five components of atthangiko maggo, there are threeother components. generally speaking, the tenms used are night speech(正語),right action(正業)and right livelihood(正命).but instead of using these three terms, both these textsuse three other special terms. They are bodv, the spoken word, and the mind. They are sel-dom used in the other texts in the tripitaka. The paragraphs in the two texts are as shownbelow.
k-syj)
〓上頭三法。三道行。已具足行。何等爲三道。一直口。二直身。三直意。如是。是得道者八種道。
xxdd-a29)
〓東
〓身意造業是三悉淨。爾乃得成八正道行。〓
Samatha vipassana・ cattaro ariyasaccaniThe concept of "samathavipassana yuganaddha" is seldom mentioned in the works ofprimary chinese buddhism, however both of these texts mention this concept.〓-AsYj30)xxddj31)止亦觀雙倶行是觀寂二。如兩馬駕一車乘行The description of "samathavipassana yuganadcha" follows "cattaro ariyasaccani" di-rectly ink-asYj. the same description also follows " cattaro ariyasaccaniixdd-ac, but the description fills a long paragraph. however, we can find a similar descriptionin both k-asYj32)and Yc3)〓a→止亦觀雙倶行。行便行知受解34)四諦。一識苦。二舍習。三畫自證。四行道瀘。C→止觀亦如是。雙隨行。一處一時一意上至意。爲作四事。爲識苦苦相應爲斷習習相應。爲盡自證盡相應。爲行道滿道相應。we also can find it in the original Pali sourcesipetakopades,as below.evameva samathavipassana yuganaddha vattamana ekakale ..pe.. (ekakkhane ekacitte cattarikiccani karoti, dukkham parinnabhisamayena abhisameti, samudayam pahanabhisamayena ab-hisameti, nirodham sacchikiriyabhisamayena abhisameti, maggam bhavanabhisamayena abhisa-meti.)

The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesdoes the newly discovered shou fi jing originate from an indian-language textor not?h. hung)(143)And we can find the same allegories about si shi四事in both texts.〓-asYj36)
36)→譬如日出作四事。一壤冥。爲現明。三爲見色萬物。四成熟萬物。〓crj37)
止觀亦如是。正雙行。便知受解〓諦。一識苦。二舍習。三盡自證。四諦行滿也。→止觀雙倶行。一處一時一意。上要至竟。為成四事。譬如日出。上至竟,為現作四事。致明。壞冥。現色。現竟。The paragraph ofYcrj also has its original pali sources in petakopadesa38)evameva samathavipassana yuganaddha vattamana ekakale ekakkhane ekacitte cattari kiccanikaroti. Yatha va surivo udayanto ekakale apubbam acarimam cattari kiccani karoti, andhakaramvidhamati, alokam patukaroti, rupam nidassiyati, sitam pariyadiyati;The allegories of the "sun appearing" and the term "samathavipassana yuganaddha" areseldom mentioned in the theories of anapanasati. Therefore, we can confirm that the para-graph of samatha vipassana・ cattaro ariyasaccaniin k-asYj was cited from ycrj by〓n Shigao.
And we can find the other paragraph indicating two kinds of liberation in k-asYj39)and YcR.The meaning of these two paragraphs in both texts is nearly the same. yet,the chinese translation of the latter passage is more readily understandable than the for-mer, as it can be easily returned into its original pali language. therefore, the paragraphinK-asYjis most likely cited from YcRJ.K-asy41)
〓j41→欲愛不復愛。意解得脱。癡解。從解慧得脱〓cr
〓→貪愛欲不復貪。念意得解脱。癡已解。令從慧得解脆ragaviragam cetovimuttim avijaviraganca pannavimuttim4Conclusion
after comparing the two texts, k-asYj and xxdd-ac, we find that they are verysimilar in contentto sattatinsa bodhipakkhika dhamma. however, even though the trans-lations by the two authors are based on the same original sources, differences in the usageof terminologies between the two texts still remain. The reason is that the two authors re-tain their strong personal styles.〓n analyzing the contents of the Newly discovered anbom shouyi jing, we can con-clude that the text was written byan Shiago, but is not entirely a direct translation from anoriginal source, such as pali, Sanskrit, etc. an Shigao compiled it based on his knowledgeof the xxdd-'s original text. moreover, he utilized his knowledge of abhidharma,
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies(144)does the newly discovered shou y jing originate ffom an lndian-language textor not?h. hung)especially about anapanasati in writing the text, in addition, quoting some paragraphs fromYcRj and adding them to this compiled text.1)t606,p.218,7-92)kongo ji issaikyo no kisoteli kenkyu to sinsyutu butten mo ken-byn金剛寺一切経の基礎的研究と新出仏典の研究p.190-191for line number (hereafter ln[22-1583)ln122-1274)128-1585)「念住者。空無順三摩地各四念住倶。無相三摩地唯法念住倶。」(t1545,p.539,b19-21)6)this theory isalso mentioned inapitan pipo sha lun阿毘曇昆婆沙論(t1546,p.3,1-2), shunheng li lu順正理論(t1562,p7,c3-4)) and zang 〓izg iun藏顯宗論(t1563,p.971,b14-157)ln159-1628)t606,p.218,18-199)ln164-18410)t606,p.218,19-2511)t606,p.218,a19-2212)ln64-16713)not only are theusage of the terminologies欲定paragraph in the two texts are parallel to each other, but the otherthree patagraphs,精進定,意定and思惟定are, as well.(,p.28,23-25)&n168-181)14)srbh.,p.290,13f-17ff,patna,197315)ln9016)ln10417)ln1018)606,p.217,b8-1019)t603,p.176,a1120)petakopadesa p122,f14,pts1982,Editedby arabinda barua, ph.dlondon)21)ln192-19922)t15,p.2128-b123)we find the terms③感意and①感意are eror wrote from"惡意"c.f.佛説大安般守意經T602,p.17,2-624)we can find the same concepts iapitam ganluwei lun阿昆曇甘露味論「信等五力惡不善法不能壤。是謂力。」(t1553,p.977,b24-25)25)安般曰。念覺種意。是之謂」(t1694,p.17,9-20)26)petakopadesa p115,ff627)we findonly one instance in a translation by wu luocha無羅叉,wu most likely followed the translatiorfromzhu Fahu.28)ln217-21829)t60,p.218,b9-1030)ln22031)t606,p.218,b1232)ln220-22133)t603,p.17,b25-2834)theterm知受解zhi shou jie does exist in other an shigao's works, except for k-asYJ. it parallels相應xiang ying in YcrJ. and the latter has its counterpart pali term "abhisamaya" (noun) or "bhisa-meti (verb) ipetakopadesa.35)petakopadesap35,f-236)ln222-22537)5,p.17b9-1238)petakopadesa p42639)ln222274)5,p.172-41)l22722742)t15,p.172-b143)pet-akopadesa p13,ff15-16(key words) anban shouyi jing an shiago original text(assistant Prof. of dharma drum buddhist college, taiwanN)
