The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesjournal ofindian ad buddmhist stucties vol.56,no.3, march円The significance of the Thirty-two lakkhanas ofaBuddha
Nitta tomomichiSome scholars have often brushed off the issue of the origin of buddha's thirty-twclakkhanas (Skt. laksana, bodily marks) by attributing them to the deification of the budchajotana.1) however, a few have expressed the view that they function in some Mahayanasutras as obiects of observation when people meditate on a buddha.according toswearer (2002),modern theravadins also use these in this way as well. in his study onthe ceremony for the consecration of buddha images in the modern Theravada tradition ofSoutheast asia, he has clarified that the thirty-two lakkhanas of a buddha image are cor-related with the thirty-two meditation obiects (kammatthana) in the ceremony.〓 Moreover,although the meditation ona buddha's physical form is hardly ever foundin old hinayanatexts, we can discover a few sentences, which mention it in the chinese agamas.4of course, there is not enough evidence to prove that a buddha's lukkhancs have beenused as meditation obiects from the vety beginning of their introduction into buddhismHowever, there seems little doubt that they have been utilized in such a way in mahayanaand late hinayana buddhism. if that is the case, we ought to think that they wete not meremeaningless " adornments" to make the "historical buddha" into a superhumman, but insteadhave some sort of symbolic meaning right from the start, which eventually made the lak-khanas become objects of meditation later on. Therefore, this paper intends to examinemeanings of seeing a buddha's lakkhanas through considering early and sectarian bud-dhist scriptures with the central focus placed upon the interpretation of the lakkhanas inpali commentary, the "Mahapadanasuttatthakatha" (hereafter mpa).First, we will begin by considering scriptures other than the mPa. one of the sutraswhich describes these thirty-two lakkhanas in detail is the " brahmayusutta."5)here, 〓brahman called brahmayu, who is well versed in the lakkhanas of "great Men," and hisdisciple visit gotamna buddha separately and through their viewing of his lakkhanas which
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesdispels their doubts, faith rises in both of them. in this way,a buddha's lakkhanas are presented as having the power to provoke faith. similar stories can be found in the suttanipotoand the theraguthu, where a brahman sela, who is also learned in lakkhcnas, comes tobelieve in the buddha by viewing them.) furthermore, the vinaya of mulasatvastivadintells of gotama's half-brother Nanda,' who, in his previous birth, led a licentious life asthe half-brother of a king, while the buddha vipassi was living. however, one day he de-veloped deep faith in the buddha when he saw vipassi's thirty-two lakkhanas and eightyanubyanjanas ( minor marks). in the udunatthakatho, the Pali commentator dhammapalastates as follows: " fromevery part [of his body, the lord] causes faith in a man who wantsto view his physical body, which is adorned by the thirty-two lakkhanas of great men, theeighty anubyanjanas, a halo extending for a fathom anda garland of brightness."8in thiway, according to several sectarian buddhist scriptures, a buddha's lakkhanas have thepower to arouse faith.another sutra, which includes details of the lckkhanas is the lakkhanasuttanta in thedighanikoya,9 and shows another interpretation of these physical attributes. There, eachof them is preached about as recompense for good deeds by buddhas in their previousbirths. Such an understanding can be foundin the commentary of the suttanipatha as well,in which a sentence in the latter states, "he (gotama) does not steal," is explained as fol-lows: "the lord has avoided stealing and so on, not only right now but also for a long timein the past. The lord has achieved each lakkhana with his majestic power due to each ofhis abstinences."1)according to okada(1991),such an understanding can be found inthe lalitapistara and many other mahayana sutras.11The tp-p'o-ha lun大毘婆沙論,a sarvastivadin work, conveys three reasons whyBuddhas (ot bodhisattvas) adomn their own bodies with the lakkhanas: (1)to make peoplewho do not accept a buddha's teachings receive them,(2)to reveal the excellence of abudcha's characteristics and convince people believe in the dharma they teach, (3)tomake themselves a container which is appropriate for the supreme and right enlighten-ment.12)of these, the first two are practically the same as the powers described above irterms of content, i.e., to remove doubts and provoke faith in the buddhas.Now. let us turn to an examination of the interpretation of the thirty-two lakkhanas inhe Mpa. however, though this work explains thirty-one of these all together, rather thar
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesThe significance of the Thirty-two lakkhanas of a buddha (t. nitta)introducing and describing each one by one, we consider its descriptions of them in termsof their powers describedin the texts above.First. the understanding that the thirty-two lakkhanas come from past good deeds canalso be found in the mpa. The "mahapadanasuttanta"" mentions "having a body like a lion'storso" (sihapubbaddhakaya) as the seventeenth lakkhana,13)and the mpaexplains this as"in the lion's case, only its torso is perfect while the lower half of its bodyis not. however,in the case of a "great man," his whole body is as perfect as a lion's torso."14)following this, it states that a buddha's body is free from imperfections and the reason for this isshown by a citation, which seems to be a part of a sutra, as follows:In this way, according to the mpa, a buddha obtains " the body like a lion's torso" be-cause of his previous good deeds.we can also confirn in the same text another meaning of the lakkhanas, that is, they areable to remove doubts and provoke faith ina buddha. This attribute can be found in theexplanation for "ethe large tongue"" (pahutajvho), where it states that:when a result of a good deed arises, parts of the body which look beautiful by being long becomelong. parts of the body which look beautiful by being short become short. parts of the body whichlook beautiful by being thick become thick. parts of the body which look beautiful by being thinjecome thin. parts of the body which look beautiful by being tlat become flat. parts of the bodywhich look beautiful by being round become round.15,In order to remove suspicions of men who have come to see this lakkhana .e., "the largtongue"),he (buddha) moves his tongue like a needle using its softness and makes it touch bothapertures of his nose, and using its length makes it touch both apertures of his ear, and using itswidth makes itcover his whole foreheaduntil the hairline. in this way, showing the softness. lengttmd width [of his tongue], he removes their suspicions.16)now, it might be considered to be a matter of course that these two intetpretations ofthe lakkhanas, namely that they are the results of good deeds ina buddha's previous livesand that they remove doubts and provoke faith ina buddha, can also be found in the mPaas the pali nikayas and others have already presented them. Therefore. how about the un-derstanding that buddhas adorn their own bodies with the iakkhanas "to make themnselvesa container which is appropriate for the supreme and right enlightenment,7ヲ which is men-tioned in the tapi-p'o-sha lu there is no description in either the mpaor any otherpali documents that is exactly the same as the one presented here. however. we can readin
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesthe mPaan understanding which relates to that of the 〓p-p'o-sha lun. according to themPa, the thirty-two lukkhanas of a buddha are not merely superhuman and unusual char-acteristics but represent the perfection ofhis physical body.asis stated above, all but one lakkhana are explained in detail in the mPa, and nineteenof these commentaries compare these characteristics with the usual human body. in moscases, the comparison suggests that this body is imperfect and ugly while a buddha's,which possesses the thirty-two lakkhanas, is perfect and beautiful. for example, the maha-radanasuttanta states thata bodhisattva has the "seven protuberances" (sattassdacthe mPaexplains this statemment as follows:It is said [in the sutra] that he ( the bodhisattva) has the "seven protuberances" because he hascomplete protuberances of flesh in seven places, i.e., the back of both his hands, the back of bothhis feet, his shoulders and his back. in the case of others, you can find venous networks on thebacks of their hands and feet, and the tips of bones in their shoulders and back. those people lookike hungry ghosts. however, the great manis not like that. The great man moves with hands andfeet. whose venous networks are concealed because he has complete protuberances of fesh in seven places, and looks like a stone statue or a decorated image because of his back which is similartca small drum of gold.18Letus cite another instance. in the "mahapadanasuttanta," the following three are listedas the twenty-fourth, twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth lakkhanas:(1) having equal teethmadamta),(2)having teeth without any gaps (aviraladanta),(3)having pure white cuspidssusukkadatha).19)as to these, the mpaexplains as followsIn the case of others, teeth are unequal, such as some are long and some are short. however, in his(the bodhisattva's) case, they will become equal like a seashell cut by a saw. in the case of oth-ers, teeth become sparse like those of crocodiles and when they eat fish or meat, it gets stuck in theteeth. in his case, however, he will have teeth which are without gaps, like a row of diamonds en-cased in a gold slab and [equal] like cteases put in a mattress. in addition, while others have rotteneeth and therefore some cuspids darken or get discolored, he will obtain pure white cuspids, whiclpossess a brightness shining beyond the light of the star of healing.In this way, the ma presents the usual human body as imperfect and ugly, while thebodies of buddhas (and bodhisattvas), which possess the thirty-two lakkhanas, are said tobe faultless and beautiful. This understanding closely resembles the description in the tap-p'o-sha lun, because the usual human body in the mPaclearly cannot be a container ofthe supreme and right enlightenment due to its imperfectness, but a body adorned with thethirty-two lakkhanas can be such a vessel because of its faultlessness and completeness,
The uapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhistStudiesThe significance of the thirty-two lakkhanas ofa buddha (t. nitta)due to the bodhisattvas' performance of many good deeds in their past lives. by organiz-ing the descriptions of the mpaand the Tp'o-sha lun like this, we can discover con-sistency between the two.It has become clear that in early and sectarian buddhist scriptures, the lakkhanas areconsidered to be fruits of many good deeds in a buddha's past lives and provoke faith inhim. it would appear that such an interpretation has been held since the vety beginningof the introduction of the lakkhanas into buddhism because its evidence can be found insutras like the suttanipata, the theragatha, the maijhimanikoya and the chung a-hangching中阿含経.These are viewed as the earliest among scriptures that include descriptionsof the lakkhanas. moreover, it is stated in the tp'-p'o-sha lun that buddhas adorn theirbodies with these to make themselves containers, appropriate for the supreme and right en-lightenment, and according to the mpa, they also express the completeness of their physi-cal bodies.
As was mentioned at the beginning of this paper, the lakkhanas function as objects ofobservation when people meditate ona buddha in mahayana and late hinayana. however,is it possible to insist at the same time, as some scholars do, that before then they weremerely there to demonstrate the superhuman nature or greatness of gotama buddha? weshould understand that the lakkhanas have had symbolical meanings from the start (apartfrom the matter of how much they were schematized and developed over time) rather than thinkthat they were originally mere "adornments"" and lacked significance in themselves andwere only given meanings as objects of observation later on. in other words, the lakkhanascould be meditation obiects because they might have been understood in such a way sothat, by meditating on them, one is able to recall good deeds in the past lives ofa buddha,confirm his perfection and establish faith in him.coomaraswamy ([927]1972)states that "it must be remembered too that buddhist andHindu images were not regarded and never have been regarded in india as works of art,they were made as means of edification."21perhaps the same is equally true of the lak-khanas. certainly they seem very unnatural, leading us to wonder all the more whetherancient buddhists merely believed in them literally and with superstition. if they had not,but instead accepted the lakkhanas in a meaningful way, it may suggest that they were un-derstood symbolically.
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSREFERENCES
coomaraswamy, a. k. [1927]1972.the origin of the budchiage. 〓nd ed., new delhiMunshiram manoharlal.Endo toshiichi.1997. buddmhaiheravad budchism ty of the concept of buddha in thePali commentaries. dehiwela, Sri lanka. buddhist cultural center.Fukuhara Ryuzen福原隆善.1991.butten ni okeru byakugoso仏典における白毫相.indogakubukkyogaku kenyru印度學仏教學研究40,no.1,pp.1-11.Seki minoru関稔.1985.shakusonkan no ichidanmen: sanjuniso setsu o tyusin to shite釈尊観の一断面:三十二相説を中心として.in shakuso kcm釈尊観.ed. by nihon bukkyo gakkai.Kyoto: heirakuii shoten.Swearer, donald k.2004. becoming the buddho. princeton, oxford: princeton university press.Takada osamu高田修.1967. butsuzo no kigen佛像の起源.tokyo: iwanami shoten.ui hakuju宇井伯寿.1927. indo tetsugaku kenkyu印度哲學研究.vol.4. tokyo koshishashobo.
yamada meii山田明爾.1967. kanbutsu zanmai to saniuniso: daijo jissendo seiritsu no shuher観仏三味と三十二相:大乗実践道成立の周辺.bukkyogaku kenkyz佛教學研究24,pp.27-48.
1)see ui1927,p.83, takada97, pp.58-59,yamada19, p.37;seki198,p.52,endc1997,pp.135-7.2)see takada1967,pp.234, yamada1967,pp.3,84,fukuhara1991,p.11.3)swearer 2004,p.189.he also discusses the correspondence between the body parts of bud.tha images and buddhist doctrines (Swearer0,pp.190-1).4)tseng-i a-hang ching増一阿含経,taisho 2,55417, pieh-i a-hang ching別訳雑阿含経,taisho2,4-16.5)maiihimanikoya ii,133,11-146,21.its chinese translations are "Fan mo ching"梵摩経〓nchung a-hang ching ( taisho l,68al-690a8)ad n mo yi ching梵摩渝経(taisho 1,883b6-88a21)
6)suttamiputa2,22-112,theragutha ver.818-841.7)ken-p'e shuo-i-ch'e-yu-pu p'i-nai-yeh s-shi根本説一切有部昆奈耶雑事,taisho24,〓60c6-261b17.8)udanatthakatha87.3-6.9)dighanikayaiii,142,1-179,11.its chinese translation is "san-shih-erh hsiang ching"三十二相経in chung a-hang ching (taisho 1,491-494b8).10)paramatthaiotika iii,203,16-19.11)okada1991,pp.12-16.12)taisho27.889a28-889b15.13)dighanikaya ii,18,12.
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist studiesThe significance of the thirty-two lakkhanas ofa buddha (T. nitta)(6514)sumangalavilasini ii,448,21-23.15)sumangalavilasini ii,448,27-449.2.16)sumangalavilasini ii,450,22-28. what is stated here can be found also in the "brahmayu-sutta." however, this is not mentioned in the "mahapadanasuttanta" and that might be why bud-dhaghosa added this explanation in MPa.17)dighanikoyaii,18,10.18)sumangadavilasiniii,448,11-1919)dighanikoyaii,18,22-24.20)sumangalavilosini ii,450,10-19.21)coomaraswamy [1927]1972,p.31.kall the page and line numbers of the Pali texts are based on the pali text society editions.(keywords> lakkhana, Mahapadanasuttatthakatha.(Part-time lecturer, musashino university)
