The  uapanese sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSjournal ofindian and buddhist studies vol.56,no.3, march(109watanabtoshikazu0.Introductiondharmakirti makes changes to dignaga's definition of asapaksa. dignaga insists thatas regards the meaning of the negative particle nan in the term sapaksa', only abhauashould be accepted, but not anya nor viruddha. in his nyoayabincu ii9, however, dhar-makirti accepts all these three senses. In regard to this issue, prof. katsura points out thatdharmakirti's classification of virodha into two kinds and his developments upo apohgtheory are assumed to be the reasons why he differs with dignaga over the definition ofusapaksa, however katsura does not discuss the problem in detail.1in this paper i shallexamine how dharmakirti builds anvc atd viruduha into the meaning of ncn in the tern〓sapaksa", and consider what the reasons might be for his doing so.1. dignaga's defimition of asapaksa and vasubandhu's classification of nan1.1Ivosi5cd, dignaga rules out both anya and viruddha as the meaning of nariin the term'sapaksa". after having explained the second characteristic of the logical rea-son, he advocates that the third characteristic of the logical reason also should be describedby adding the particle eva as "asaty eva nustite" and that this eva is added for the purposeof restricting the meaning of nan to abhava, but not anya nor viruddhc.v)〓19,moreover, he again enumerates aya, (2) virudipaksa)d()abhova as pos-sible alternatives of the meaning of nan and gives the following examples tespectively4(1)srog chags kyirigs mayi jair apraninam.)(2)bsod nams kyi med (k), bsod nams mai*apuny〔3)chgspo bkagp ts,〓odpa bkag pa fs*らhavapratisedhamutrHaving ruled out both(1) and (2), dignaga admits only (3)abhava as the meaning of nan.The reason why (anya is not adopted is explained as follows
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies[1-1]if what is different (apya) from similar instances (sapaksa) were asapaksa, then there woulkbe no [valid] ogical reason. to be more precise, [the logical reason] being produced' etc whichare present in the domain of the similar instances (i.e. impermanent things) is also present in pain-ul things (duhkha) etc which is different from impermanence and so on.)when what is to be proved is being "impermanence' (amipyatva), the sapaksa is what pos-sesses impermanence. in this case, if anya were taken as the meaning of the negative par-ticle ofasqpakya, then painful things and pot etc., which should be included in the sapaksa(ie. impermanent things), would end up fallaciously included in the asapaksa because theypossess different properties other than impermanence'. Therefore, the logicalreason 'beingproduced' (krtakatra ) becomes 〓common as well as equivocal' (sadharananaikantika) becauseitis present both in the sapaksa and asapakya.next, dignaga explains the problem which occurs when virnddha is the meaning of nan.[1-2]moreover, if whatis opposite (viruddha) ofsapaksa were asapaksa, then, with respectto "whatis to be proved"hyadharmin), [the logical reason] would make known [nerely] the exclusior(vyavacchedda) from that (asapakya) in which [the logical reason]is never present. andifso, [whenone says thatlhere is heat because there is fire"", fire [as the logical reason] would make knowt[only] the absence of coldness with respect to the feel but would never make known the absence oiwhatis neither hot nor cold.8if piruddha is the meaning of nan, then when what is to be proved is 'heat' ausnya), thusmaking cold things asapaksa. but in such a case, there would be another domain of in-stances, namely, the domnain of what is neither hot nor cold (anusnosita ), which occurs out-side of both the sapaksa and asapaksa. therefore, the logical reason "fire' would not be avalid one because it would make known not only the presence of heat but also the presenceof whatis neither hot nor cold.91.2as to the meaning of negative particle nan, vasubandhu classifies it into four kindsin his abhidharmakosabhosya and seven kinds in his pratitycsamuppadvyakhyvy)when he explains the word 'avidyd'.Though both of his classifications contain allof the above mentioned (1)〓o(3),his explanation ivy is more remarkable becauseit gives example(s) of each of the seven mmeanings. of these examples, rigs srog chags〓a yi/* jatip apraninam)is given as the example for anya, and bsod nams medp*apunya is one of the examples given for gnyenipakirudcha). besides, ifanya were taken as the meaning of nan in the term 'avidya', then the following problemwould occur: even eyes etc. would become avidyu. and this problem looks very similar to
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesthat which occurs in ) mentioned above.11)from this, it can be seen that dignaga's de-scription of nan in the term 'sapaksa" is almost the same as that of vasubandhu as given〓vy.
2.dharmakirtiis modifications of the definition ofasapaksa2.1Inbi8-9,dharmakirti defines asapaksa as follows.〓pvinii, dharmakirti cites pv)osii5d'and refers to the problems raisedby dig-asapaksa is what is not sapakya, [i.e.] what is different (anya) fromit (sapaksa), what is opposite(viruddha) ofit, and what is the absence (abhava) ofit.here he adds anya and viruddha as the meaning of negative particle, while both of themare not accepted by dignaga. looking at his earlier work pvin, however, we can see howhe makes this modification.naga in[-1]and[1-2]12)he says thatwhatis not tatuya (ie. sapaksya ) is also [asapaksa]13Here it is not clear whether both anya and viruduha are adopted as the meaning of nan. inpviniiionk.33, however, he says:[2]asapaksa is the absence of it (ie. sapaksa). [objection:]in this case, why ca [you]say that[the logical reason should] not be present in the absence [of what is to be proved?nswer:[The negative particle in the term]sapaksa" means not only such [kind of] negation e. prasa-jyapratisedha). then what? [t means] all counter-correlates (pratiyogin), ie.] negation [uponassumption](nisedhprasaijyapratisedha) and what is excluded (paryudasta) because asapaksais characterized as what is not that (i.e. sapaksa). and the intended counter-correlates are equal inthis [point (i.e. in being what is not sapukya)because the understanding of negative concomitanck[vyatireka) is equalin any cases, [ie.] whether directly or indirectly.14Firstly, dharmakirti defines asapaksa as the abhava of sapaksa. after raising the objection.howevcr, he accepts not only nisedha but also paryudasta as the ineaning of the negativearticle. In this case nisedha corresponds to abhara, and paryudasta corresponds to bothanyya and viruddha. the important point is that he lumps nisedha and paryudasta togetheras the intended counter-cotrelate (vivaksith pratiyogin).it is well known that in his theoryof apoha the pratiyogin, which is to be excluded, is assumed by way of the speaker's in-ention (vivakso )1)Therefore, on the basis of21cited above, it can be seen that the theoryof apoha developed by dharmakirti has an effect on his modification of definition whichtakes not only abhava but also anya and viruddha as the meaning of the negative particle.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies〓
but there is another factor relating to his modification. in above cited21,an obiectionisinterposed. and starting the discussion about asapakya again, the same kind of the obiec-tionis raised.[objection:]how can you say that [the logical reason] is present or is not present [in the absence ofsapaksal because absence cannot be a substratum21)This kind of objection is also raised inpinii.itis likely that this objection is tracedback to uddyotakara's following obiection against the third characteristic of the logicalreason mentionedini5d'.and "not being present in the absence""(psii5')is stated without any consideration. what doesbot exist in itself does not exist, for non-existence cannot be a substratum. if not so (ie. if it ex.sts), then the negation ofit could occur.18[objection] if asapakya is [defined as] such  as what is not sapukya), then there would beno logical reason since everything falso] possesses properties which are other [than what is to beproved].answer:] [Such a fault does] not [occur]. For example, [in the case of the expression]" abruhmana"" [the fault does not occur]. indeed ordinally people do not understand that a man isa brahman due to possessinng the property of that (i.e, the property of 〓 brahman-hood") [and at theame time] is not a brahman due to possessing a property which is other thanbrahman-hood"].Then how  do they understand it1They understand that] aman who is not the substratum of theintended property (ie. 〓brahman-hood") is signified by the word "abrahmana"]sce even if thereferent of nan is ama, [they] use [the word "abruhmana" in order to denote ksatriya etc.] by dis-toathe coilsn s ghniceuleos wnrisotrhnainr sdsenve negrioncmocu〓pviniii, dharmakirti gives an answer to this objection.To this [objection], have already] aswered that in regard to non-existence negation c occuand that asapaksa is characterized as whatis not that (ie. sapaksa)9of these two responses, the former is the reason why we can say that the logical reasoris not present in the absence of sapaksa and this refers to pvinik.18where dharmakirtisays that in our everyday verbal activity, a negative expression c occur not only in re-gard to existence but also in regard to non-existence. The latter is the reason why we casay that the logical reason is present in the absence of sapaksa and this refers to citedabove. there, it is said that both nisedha and paryudasta are accepted as the meaning ofnan. considering these situation, uddyotakara's obiection can be regarded as one of thefactors behind dharmakirti's modification of dignaga's definition of asapaksa.2.2however if dharmakirti accepts both anya and viruddha, he should solve the prob-lems raisedin[-]ad[-21.Inregard to this, he explains:
The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudieStinguishing [them from brahmans]0The opponent raises the problem which has been mentioned by dignaga to the effect thatifanya is the meaning of nan, then the logical reason would be sadharananaikuntika becauseeverything possesses different properties in addition to that which is to be proved. dhar-makirti answers by taking the word 'abruhmana' as an example. the brahman possessesnot onty ' brahman-hood" but also other properties such as 'being human' etc. however, heis not called "abruhmana" in everyday verbal activity. Therefore, from the point of viewofeveryday verbal activity, the problem does not occur.However, another problem raised in-remains unsolved, but although dharmakirtidoes not provide a directresolution of it, a solution may be inferred. as is well known, heclassifies virodha incompatibility" into two kinds, sahonavasthana and parasparapariha-rasthitalaksana (abb. p-virodha). of these, the former cotresponds to the viruddha in ques-tion. as we have already seen, when the virudldha is taken as the meaning of nan, therewould still be another domain in addition to sapaksa and asapaksa. however, when theviruddha is interpreted as p-virodha, the problem mentioned in-2des not occur be-cause p-virodha is established between two mutually contradictory itemns, thus rendering ithird domain impossible.21)〓.in this way, having solved these problems, dharmakirti includes both anya and virud-dha in the definition of asapaksain nb and hb.)however, it seems that dharmakirti isnowhere attempting to fill the gap that exists between his definition and that of dignaga,xcept for the portionincited above. but there, all that dharmakirti has said is "theunderstanding of negative concomitance is equal whether directly or indirectly." basedonthis remark, however, commentators such as arcata and dharmottara try to reconcile thedifference between dignaga and dharmakirti.according to arcata, both anya and viruddha can be reduced to abhawa because they con-tain abhova. Therefore, if one could adopts only one of these three as the meaning of nan,then abhaua should be chosen.)following this interpretation, dharmottara says in hisNbT that as long as abhoua of sapaksa is not understood, both aya and viruddha cannotbe understood and therefore, nan means directly abhoua but indirectly anya and virud-dha.24)

The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesas regards the meaning of nan in the term 'asapaksa', dignaga insists that only abhauais acceptable but not anya nor viruddha. This restriction is made for the sake of clarifyingthe fact that our universe of discourse is totally divided in two by sapaksa and vipaksa.His illustration of anya, viruddha and abhava is almost the same as that given by vasub.andhuisvy.
dharmakirti, however, adopts anya and wiruddha as the meaning of nan by introducing (i)the theory of vivaksa hich plays an important role in his apoha theory, (ii) the standpointof everyday verbal activity, and (iii) his classification of virodha. in addition, uddyotaka-ra's obiection that non-existence cannot be a substratum can be regarded as a factor whichmotivates dharmakirti to modify the definition.It seems that dharmakirti has no strong intention to reconcile his definition with that ofdignaga. it is the task of dharmakirti's commentators to reconcile this apparent differ-nce. They try to do so by means of the theoty that both anya and viruddha can be tracedto abhova.
*i thank to mr. andrew mcgarrity for correcting my english.[abbreviations] astudhyoyi of panini. dh dharmottarapradipa ed. d. malvania, patna.1971.dht dharmottaratippanaka ed. h. Yaita, narita,2005.〓b hetubindu ed. e. steinkell-ner. wien,1967.〓bT hetubindutika eds. S. Sanghavi and jinavijayaji, barodha,1949.hbthetubindufikaloka. see hbT.kv tr. kanakavarma702.nb nyayabindu, see dhp. nv:nyauuvarttikg ed. a. Thakur, new delhi,1997.ps pramanasamuccayatikua,,5766.pvin pramanaviniscaya second chapter, ed. e. Steinkellner, wien,〓7.pvin id421,P5710.vsv tr. vasudararaksita d42,701.inami, masahito 199reconsideration ofthe theory of vyavaccheda, jjournal of indiom ad buduhist stucies vol.,p.70.kat-sura, Shoryu: paksa, sapaksa, asapaksa in dignaga's logic, hokkaido journal of indological〓d budchist studies vol.18, pp.20-33.kusumoto, nobumichi 007『倶舎論』における世親の縁起観,kvoto. meior, marek 2on the sevenfold classification of the negative particle(na) (grammatical explanation ofa-vidyo in vasubandhu's pratityasamupa-vyukhya ).eorbuddhism d abhidharma thought,〓onorof doctor hajime sakurabeis seventy-seventlbirthdoy, pp.87-100, kyoto.notesl1)see katsura3-31.2)see k(p18a8-111)n5,-7.c.vd2-6,3-4).3)inthis portion dignaga uses both mi mrhun'i phyogs/*vipaksa and 'gl b/* viruddha in order to denote the meaning  opposite'.4)cf.K(13-4),vd,4-6).5)only k has the description of ayd and its ex-ample. for the Sanskrit reconstruction of " jotir apraninam," see mejor20290.6K〓p14-5),vda-6,p48a6-7).7)see psd2b3-5,p16b1-3).8)see
The  uapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhistStudies3)see psT(12b5-6,p1b3-5).K(p1b5-7),v-45b1,p-48b1).9)see psT(b5-6,p1863-5)10)see meior, kusumoto07.11)see meior0293-94, kusummoto721-219.12)pvin,6-10.13)pvini52,10-11.14)pviniii (202-4,p2992-4)〓Dhp99,12-14.15)see inammi1990407-408.16)pviniid2035,p3b5-6).17)pvini,11-12.18)nV52,17-18.19)pviniii (20a5-6,p30b6-7).20)pvinii2036-7,p37-301al).c. dhp8,21-23,99,7-8.21)See dhT4,-7and〓b24,1-12.22)Nbi8-9and B7*,1-16.23)see hb75,18-22.24)see nbt99,3-100,2.(this research was supported in part by a grant-in-aid for jSps fellows)<key words) dignaga, dharmakirti, asapaksa, han, anya, viruddha, abhura(research Fellow of the japan Society for the promotion of science)財団法人仏教伝道協会英訳大蔵経翻訳叢書THEbaIZAnGNMOaSTICRGULaTInS(勅修百丈清規)
Translated by Shohei ichimuraB5変形判・定価6,500円
