The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieshow to interpret and preach the buddha's Teaching:The discussionin chapter 5 of the vyakhyayuktiHoriuci Toshio1.introductionThe vyakhyayukti (vyy) is a work by vasubandhu which deals with methods of exege-sis. as has been exhaustively shown by peter Skilling (2000), this work had a great influ-ence on later indian and Tibetan buddhism. this is especially the case with the fivefoldmethod of exegesis discussed in ch.1of the vyY. This method of exegesis is, however,taken up again frorn a somnewhat different viewpoint at the start of ch.5.moreover, thissection is important for considering not only the characteristics of the vyY but also meth-ods of interpreting and preaching the buddha's teaching.This paper first examines the method of exegesis elucidated in the vyy by investigat-ing descriptions foundin ch.1and ch.5of the vyY. secondly, this paper points out withreference to some passages fro ch. 5that the vyy was written for those who undertakeexegesis and that the method of exegesis in the vyY is closely linked to preaching in thepresence of an audience.2.the method of exegesis in the vyy2.1.the argumentinch.1of the vyyat the start of ch.1, after having given two opening verses, vasubandhu proclaims thethree necessary conditions which those who wish to elucidate the sutras must fulfill.Those who wish to elucidate the sutras should first(1) be erudite(*bahusruta),(2)hold fast(retain in their minds) the sacred word ( thos pa'i gzhi can,* srutadhara,and (3)accumulatelearing(srutusamnicuyu).(vyy, lee 2-4)after interpreting one canonical passage immediately after the above passage, Vasu-bandhu then explains the well-known fivefold method of exegesis which comprises(1)prayojana purpose',(2)pindartha "summarized meaning', (3)padartha "meaning of
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesNords", (4)anusamdhi econnection", and (5)codyaparihara objections and responses'(vyY, lee 6.5-11).as is evident from lee (2001), the critical edition of the vyy, this textisitself composed in line with this fivefold method of exegesis. Further, this method as advo-catedin ch.1of the vyY had a great influence on later buddhist traditions.〓ch.5,on the other hand, this method is mentioned again from a somewhat differentperspective. ch.5begins as follows.(a)the aspect of objections and responses(*codyaparihara) is also explained, and (b) themethod of how to elucidate the sutra is also explained [in the previous chapters ]. Furthermore,the preacher of the teaching (chos smra ba po,* charma-bhanaka/ kathika) first ought to cite(fwrite down, bkod) the sutra and then s) [oughtto] inquire [into the meaning of the sutra].however, in order to establish an attentive ear(〓arahitasrotra ), i shall explain [a story] abouthearing the teaching(*charma) with respect (gus par mnyampa dang lnpa).Question what is this " [story]about hearing the teaching with respect" nswer]iThis means]to teach to hear with respect based on a stoty(*katha). if [the hearer] is attentive of ear, onsshould explain the sztra in the order ofpurpose(* prapyoiana), etc. (vyY, lee2504-13)"purpose. etc." here means the fivefold method of exegesis elucidatedinch.1. thus, thedescriptions of the method of exegesis in ch. land ch.ofthe vyy seemto be contradic-tory. This is because, as quoted above, in the system of the method of exegesis describedich.1, the " purpose"" is referred to as the first item, whereas here in ch. 5the first item ofthe exegesis is said to be 〓[a story]about hearing the teaching with respect." the questionthen arises as to which should be understood as the first item in the method of exegesis irthe vyy.
when investigating this question, the following two points seem to be worth noting.First, this statement in ch.5of the vyY does not seem to be rejecting the method of ex .egesis elucidatedin ch.lbecause vasubandhu himself states that he has already finished]explaining the method of exegesis ((b) above). Secondly, at the same time, this part of thevyYis not a mere supplementary section of the *codyaparihara, because he also states thathe has [already finished] explaining the method of exegesis ((a) above) in which*cody-aparihara is the fifth and last item. but it is true that he refers to " purpose." the first itemof the exegesis, in ch.l and places " a story about hearing the teaching with respect"" priorto that.2)
Then again, how is this chapter ofthe vyy to be positioned clue to resolving this con-tradiction seems to be the phrase chos smrahapo or "preacher of the doctrine"" at the start
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiesof ch.5, which is not found in the previous chapters of the vyY. in the other chapters ofthe vyY,on the other hand, similar but different kinds of people are indicated as exponentsof the teaching. namely, at the start of the vyy. vasubandhu declares that this text is writ-ten for those who wish to explain the sutras"" (mco rnams 'chad 'dod de dag l, vyY, lee 1.14).Furthermore, ch.2begins with the preliminary statement that this chapter is explained "inorder to give rise to skillfulness in explaining (bshad pa) the meaning of the words for oth-ers"" (vyY, lee33.11-12).In this case, to "explain" ('chad, bshad) the sutras does not neces-sarily mean to "preach" in the presence of an audience), unlike chos smra ba or "preach thedoctrine." Thus, ch.5is understood as dealing with another subject, namely, instructionsfor those who preach the teaching in the presence of an audience, not as a continuation ofthe fifth method of exegesis, codyaparihora.Indeed, ch.5of the vyyis unique in that it inchudes many stories for the preacher (s) ofhe teachings. in the next section, therefore, i shall introduce some passages from ch.5and demonstrate this characteristic of the vyYas instructions for preachers.2.2.exegesis and preachingInch.5, vasubandhu elucidates [a stoty] about hearing the teaching with respect as fol-lows:
[question]how should one explain [a story] about hearing the teaching with respect] swer]By(1)exhortation,(2) showing the punpose, and(3)producing(upa-sam-hr)(a) marvel-ous, (b) joyful, and (c) depressing stories for (a') [those who are ] dispirited (a') by torpor(*styana) and (b')by drowsiness(*midcha) and (c) those whose minds are disturbed b)wrong thoughts [respectively]. vyy, lee 25110-15)Among the above items,((b' "to produce joyful stories for those who are dispiritedby drowsiness" would not be thought of without actual experience of preaching. in ch.5,along chapter of20 folios in the derge edition4a-134a, lee250-310), vasubandhu eluci-dates these items, stories for preachers, with many illustrations.3.on the final verse of the vyyFinally, to show more of the characteristics of the vyY which i have examined in thispaper, Ishall take up the final verse of the vyyCh.5).vyY, d1347-134bl,p153-4,lee312-313
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studieshow to inteipret and preach the buddha's teaching (t. horiuchi)(93ii ltar me'i sgo bud shing yiji ltar chu'i lam gtodpa ltarde bzhin blo dang ln rnams lamco sde bshadp sh)di bstas the door of fire is firewood, [and] as the way of water is curving, likewise, this small bit ofthe method of exegesis was taught for wise persons"wise persons" here refers to those who interpret and preach the teaching. as is seenalso ffrom this final verse of the vyY, this text was written for preachers and interpreters ofthe teaching.4.conclusion
In this paper i have examined the method of exegesis in the vyy. inch.1, vasubandhuadvocates a fivefold method of exegesis beginning with * proyojana purpose'. inch.5,on the other hand, he points out that " [a story] about hearing the teaching with respect"comes prior to "puipose, etc.," viz., the fivefold method of exegesis. by focusing on theword " preacher of the teaching (chos smra bapo)" at the start of ch.5, i have argued thatthe theme of ch.5is to instruct preachers on how to preach in the presence of an audi-ence. that means, in the case of preaching, that the preacher first explains "[a story] abouthearing the teaching with respect." next, ihave shown the characteristics of the vyY as in-structions for preachers and interpreters of the teaching by introducing some passages fromCh.5.
<abbreviations)bshd bsd rnal 'byor spyodpa'i s ls rnam par bshad pa b b, p no.5043,dno.042. vyy vasubandhu, vyokhyayukti,dno.4061,PNo.5562, see lee., vyYt: gunamati,vyakhyoyukti-tika, no.406,pno.5570.<bibliography)lee (2001)Lee, jong choel, the tibetcmext of the vyakhyoyukti of vasubandhu, bibliothecalndologica et buddhologica 8,tokyo. the sankibo press.Skilling (200):peter Skilling, "vasubandhu and the vyakhyayukti Literature," journal of theinternotionlaociatioofbuddhist studties 3-2,297-350.<notes)
1)my reconstruction of this Sanskrit word is based on similar phrases found in the followingources: sravakabhumi (sravakabhumi study group, taisho university sogo bukkyo kenkyujo
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesseries 〓V,1998, the sankibo press, Tokyo).252-253,bodhisattvabhumi (u. wogiwara, ed.)175.9-10TSd,718sutodharo)hsd,53a. srutadhorah "holding fast (retaining in theirminds) the sacred word."2)immediately afterwards, vasubandhu enumerates three reasons that "a story] about hearingthe teaching with respect" is explained priorto * proyojana purpose", etc.3)as is suggested by the title, the rnm por bshad  bu b hereafter bshad bsdu) of theyogucarabhumi has many simmilarities to the vyakhyoyukti (rnam par bshadpa'i rigs pa), andacomparative study of the two texts is necessaty. however, although the bshcd bsdu also containsthe itemof ehearing [the teaching] with respect (gus par m" as its method ofexegesis, itdoes not include a detailed elucidation of it as shown in the wyybshad bsdu, d7 ff., P688ff.).
4)this gtod pa could be a rendering of *abhoga or "winding/curving." This phrase is thus understood as a dynamic simile. vasubandhu compares the method of exegesis to winding and aperson who undertakes the interpretation or preaching of buddhism to water which flows in ameandering fashion.5)This sham seems to be a rendering of *esa, which means a small bitor portion cf. pramana-varttika, r. gnoli, ed., 32.23 lesaviseyatah, and its tibetan translation: shan gyi khyad par gyisDc279a2, P ce42541).this word shan is also recordedin negi's tibetm sanskrit diction-〓rpy as a translation of lesa based on the usage foundin the tattvasamgrahapanjiku. further, thisissumption is also supported by gunamati's vyYT301a5-6,p1942-3):mdo sde'i bshadpi sham 'di mi/ mdo sde'i bshad pa ste rnm pr bshad pa mi mdo sde bshad pa'o mdo sde'ibshcd pa'i shcn te/ phogs gcig dcng chg shas mi mdo sde bshad pi shm no gunarnati herecomments that this shan means phyogs gcig and chg shas, both of which mean "part," sportion."Thus, this phrase ( mdo sae bshad p'i sham 'di bstum) in the fnal verse in the vyych.5) istranslated as: "this small bit of the method of exegesis was taught." interestingly enough, thisexpression tallies well with the opening verse in ch. lofthe vyyan ngg cung zud bstmprbya). further, a similar expression is also found in the final verse (poda ab) of the abhichar-makosabhasya. pradhan, ed., 1967,478.21)iti dinmatram evedam upadistam sumedhasom.These are understood as expressions ofmodesty.(key words) vakhyoyukti, vasubandhu, exegesis, preaching(research fellow of the japan Society for the promotion of science, ph.d.)
