The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSNagariuna and SatavahanaYAmano chiekoBoth chinese and tibetan sources include some amount of hagiography of nagarjuna anchence have been read as teference sources for re-establishing his historical activities or attesting to the authenticity of his writings. many scholars have focused on the accounts ofhis contemporaneousness with king satavahana or king kaniska and the accounts of hisactivities as a acarya of a king. the rest of his legendary accounts have been consideredas the fesult ofa later addition or the interfusion of the accounts of another nagariuna andhence have been removed from the obiect of consideration. it seems that the re-establish-ment of his historical activities using hagiographical accounts is a crucial problem. archae-ological sources that testify the existence of the historical nagariuna remain undiscovered.In fact, to date, there exists a controversy regarding the period in which nagarjuna lived-from the first century to the third century. ibegin this paper by indicating the limitations ofre-establishing his historical activities using these hagiographical accounts ; next, by focusing on the legends of nagarjuna and satavahana, iexamine the formation and developmentof the hagiography ofthe former separate from historical viewpoints.The attempt to identify king satavahana-who was nagarjuna's patron according toxuanzang (02-664)-began with indian archeology in the late nineteenth century. in theancient geogrophyy' of india, a. cunninghamconsidered king satavahana as gautamiputreSatakarni (.11who nuled over deccan in the second centuryafter cunningham, J. burgess established the dates of successive kings of the satavahana dynasty basedpn archaeological sources from amaravati and Jaggayyapeta, and he assumed yajnasri(r.178-00)or pulumayi i〓(r.215-220)4to have been nagariuna's patron5)as the in-vestigation of the remains of amaravati, jaggayyapeta, and nagarjunakonda revealed thechronology of ancient South india, the question concerning nagarjuna's patron was some-times addressed. the attempt to identify king satavahana has continued fromcunninghammnd burgess until today〓).although previous studies adopted an approach based on ar
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieschaeological sources, they assumed that the accounts of nagariuna's contemporaneousnesswith king satavahana-which was made popular from the seventh century onwards-reflect some historical facts. in addition, it should be noted that no existing archaeologicalsource provides substantiation for the relation between nagariuna anda king of the satava-hana dynasty7 ).King satavahana in indian literatureSatavahana is the name of the dynasty that ruled over deccan from the first century8)tthe third century. pratisthana (modem paithan), the capital of the dynasty, was located in theupper reaches ofthe krsna river. the satavahana dynasty is also refetred to as the 〓andhradynasty'"ipuranic literature because it ruled even the andhra region at a later time. sata-vahana is knownby various names such as satavahana, salavahana, salahana, salivahana,Sadavahana and Satakarni. additionally, Satavahana is known as hala in narrative litera-ture. 〓hala' in maharastri corresponds to the word "sada' in Sanskrit, which is an abbrevia-tion for Sadavahana" ).although these appellations do not precisely indicate a personalnane, a king named satavahana or hala appears sometimes in narrative literature. par-ticularly, king hala is known as the compiler of the sattasai, an anthology of maharastripoems. Therefore, Satavahana or hala is described as a king who has great knowledge ofliterature. although king hala is recorded in puranic literature as the eleventh king of theSatavahana dynasty, it seems that king satavahana or hala is a legendary king and thathe cannot be identified with a historical person.In buddhist literature, king satavahana was mentioned relatively early in the chineseversion of the hahamegasutra translated by tanwuchen85-433). it was said that a kingnaned Satavahana would appear in South india 12 years after the death of the bud-dhalater, the jain authors of the medieval prabandha literature wtote numerous of talesof king Satavahana12)Legends of nagarjuna and SatavahanaThe earliest accounts of the relation between nagarjuna and Satavahana appeared in the〓tug xiyuii written by xuanzang and the harsacarita written by banabhatta (c.606-647).Because the former has already been discussed in other papers),i focus on the latter andrelated texts in this paper. banabhatta natrated that nagarjuna, when visiting a naga land,
The japaneSe asSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudiesreceived a wreath of pearls from the naga king vasuki and presented itto king satavahaneupon his return. This story is inserted as an episode in a scene in which king harsa waspresented with this precious treasure by a buddhist mendicant.sa ca tair muktaphalaih patolatale pi taraganam iva darsayadbhir ekaualim akappayat/cakara ca mandakiniti nama tasyah c bhagayatah somsy srvasamosdhinamadhipateh prabhavad atyantavisaghni himamrtasambhavatrac c sparsena sarvcisattvasamta-pahorinibabhiua / ytah s tam sarpadu visosmasantaye vasukih paryadhatta / smatikramatica hoiyaty api kale kadocin numaikavalim tasman nagardicn nagariuno nama nagair evanitalptulatalam bhiksur abhikyata lebhe ca/ nirgatya c rasatalat trisamudradhipataye satava-tananamne narendraya suhrde sa daduu 〓Ina naga land, he (vasuki) made a wreath of those pearls that shone like stars and named it man.dakini. because it has the power of holy soma, the lord of all medical herbs, and because it is madefrom cool (or lunar) amrta, which is an efficacious antidote, one who touches it gets healed of allsorts of fever (or pain). vasuki always wore itto reduce fevers. as time passed on, one day, a bud.dhist monk named nagarjuna was brought to the naga land by the nagas ; he asked the naga kingfor the wreath of pearls and received it. when he returned from the naga land. he gave it to hisfriend king satavahana, the lord of three oceans.As for nagarjuna's visit to a naga land, kumarajiva35-409)has already mentioned inthe biogrophy of nagarjuna that Nagarjuna, who was invited to a naga land by nagabo-dhisattva, received the vaipulyasutra there1). wang xuance, who was sent to india as adiplomat during the seventh century, reported that there was a stupa by the seaside located100li from the capital of kosala. a king built another stupa to cover the jeweled stupa thatwas presented to the king by nagarjuna-who, in tumn, had received it froma naga kingina naga land tibetan tradition, bu-ston mentioned that Nagariuna, who invited to aNaga land by two naga children, brought clay to make a stupa and a sutra, which containsone hundred thousand verses.although the story that nagarjuna presented the preciouspearls to king satavahana is unique to the harsacarita, the plotin which the gift is givento nagarjuna by a naga king and further gifted to a king is similar to wang xuance's re-port. in this case, this gift is the wreath of pearls that is made from amrta and can relieveall sorts of pain. The power of the naga that is connected closely to vital energy becomes amediator between nagariuna and Satavahana.The birth of Satavahana is sometimes narrated as being related to the naga in indian lit-erature. in the vikramacarita, although being a later text 18), it is mentioned that he is a sorof the naga king sesa. in this story, salivahana who was supported by his father-naga
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesKing sesa-attacked and defeated the army of king vikrama of uiayini. The naga kingbreathed life into a doll army and scared away the enemy army with his naga soldiers foralivahana9)the similar episode appears even in the caturasitisiddhapravrtti, whereinNagarjuna, instead of the naga king, provided an aimy to salabhanda. he breathed lifeinto the trunk of a tree and transformed it into an elephant vehicle for the kingAgain, itshould be noted that the power of the naga that provides vital energy becomes a mediatorbetween nagariuna and satavahanaThe birth of nagariuna is also narrated as being related to the naga in Jain prabhanda lit-erature. in the prabhandakosa, he is said to be born to the naga king vasuki anda humanprincess of satrunjaya. The naga king nurtured his son with blind parental love and fedhim various potent herbs, therefore, nagarjuna attained many siddhis and became a guru ofKing satavahana Jain tradition, nagarjuna is known as a disciple of padalipta. phyl-lis granoff noted that Padalipta is also connected with the naga and that the naga's magi-cal power is one of the factors thatlink nagarjuna to padalipta .Thus, the hagiographiesof nagarjuna have been developed by linking various components and figures in legendswith naga as the motif.finally, the honorific title "trisamudradhipati", which appeared in the harsacarita, in.dicates the lord of three oceans, the west Sea, the south sea and the east sea, that is, theconqueror of deccan. Since a similar honorific title, which is added to the name of gauta-miputra Satakamni, appears in the nasik inscription,some scholar considered king sa-tavahanain the harsacarita to be gautamiputra satakarni 〓4). however, we must questionthe need to identify a legendaty figure among historical characters. the hagiographies ofNagarjuna have continuously developed and transformed through linkage of naga imageswithin the world of storytelling in deccan. although it is almost impossible to re-establishNagarjuna's historical activities using these hagiographies, they provide rich informatioro cultural circumstances of the place wherein the story is told.Notes
1)dated by burgess2)a.cunningham, the ancient geography ofindia, (trubuer, 1871)595-5963)dated by burgess4)datedby burgess
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies5)j.burgess. "The budchist stupas of amaravati and jaggayyapeta in the krishna district, ma-dras presidency, surveyedin82",archaeologicul surey ofsouthern indiia v.1(87)86)the following are the various opinions on the identification the king.Gautamiputra satakami a.cunnungham[1871].s. sastri [1954]l.joshi [1965]〓.v. ramanan[166]l.kawamuta[197]david j, kalupahana[1992vasisthiputra pulumayi, : a.k. warder [1967,1974]Gautamiputra Satakarnior vasisthiputra pulumayi, : s.ichimura [1992]Yainasri: m.winternitz[1920]Viayasri: .h.robinson[1967]j.waleser [2]Yajnasri or pulumayiii:j. burgess[1887]Viiayasri～iksvaku: i.w.mabbett [1998-7)an inscription found from near the jaggayyapeta stupa that records the name of nagarjuna.However, the inscription is traced back to the fifth andsixth centuries.8)the satavahana dynasty began with king simuka, who is said to have lived in some periodbetween the third century bc. and the first century b., however, it seems that the dynastycame to power in the first century b.c.9)lilauai : a romantic kny in maharastri prakrit of kouhala with the sanaskrit vrtti of kotr-hla, edited by a.n. upadhye, singhi jain ser.31(bharatiya vidya bhavan,1964-4910)vishnu prana : the l1th king, bhogaata prang : the 9hh king, voyu pruna : the 1h king11)大正蔵12.1099c-1100a爾時一切南方天子.復以華香供養世尊白仏言.世尊.如是弟子.何時当出在何国土名字何等.仏言.善男子.我涅盤後千二百年.南天竺地有大国王.名娑多婆呵那.法垂欲滅餘四十年.是人爾時当於中出講宣大乗方等経典.〓抜興起垂滅之法.広令是経流布於世.
12)purutanaprabamdhasanigraha, prabandhacintamani, prabamdhakosa, prabhavakacaritc13)山野智恵「ナーガールジュナとラサーヤナ」『智山学報』53(2004)14)〓h harshacariofbanabhatta, edited byv. kane (otilal banarsidass,1965:13715)大正蔵50.184c.18a大龍菩薩見其如是惜而愍之.即接之入海.於宮殿中開七寳藏.發七寳華函.以諸方等深奥經典無量妙法授之.龍樹受讀九十日中通解甚多.其心深入體得寳利.龍知其心而問之曰.看經遍未.答言,汝諸函中經多無量不可盡也.我可讀者已十倍閻浮提.龍言.如我宮中所有經典.諸處此比復不可數.龍樹既得諸經一相深入無生二忍具足.龍還送出於南天竺.
16)This reportis quoted in the fa-yu-lin.大正蔵53.589a西域志云.波斯匿王都城東百里大海邊有大塔.塔中有小塔.高一丈二尺.裝衆寳飾之.夜中毎有光曜如大火聚.云佛般泥〓五百歳後.龍樹書薩入大海化龍王.龍王以此寳塔奉獻龍樹.龍樹受已將施此國.王便起大塔以覆其上.自昔以來有人求願者.皆叩頭燒香奉獻華蓋.其華蓋從地自起徘徊漸上.當塔直上乃至空中.經一宿變滅.不知所在.17)the collected works obu-ston, editedby lokesh chandra: ya.99b
The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudies〓
de'i tse byis pa gnyis chos mnyan cing sa 'og tu song ba lasu yin dris pas klu yizer ba la slobdpon gyis gnod sbyin gyi 'dam khyer la shog gsungs pas. de dag gis klu'i rgyal po la zhus passlob dpon spyan drongs zer te sbyan drangs pas don du 'gyur bar mkhyen nas klu'i yul du byonnas chos gsungs so. de"i tse klus bzhugs par zhus pas nga mchod rten bye babzhengs pa'i 'damtsol ba dang 'bum gan 'dren du 'ongs kyibsdad mikhom. phyis 'ong srid gsungs te 'dam mangpo dang. 'bum dang yige nyung ngu yang gdan drangs te. 'bum gyi zhabs nas bag tzam klusma bskur zhes grag go.18)it is dated to the forteenth century- the sixteenth century by ludwik Stemnbach.19)vikramas aduentures: or the thirty-to tales of the throne, edited by franklin edgertonHatvard oriental series vol.27(harvard university press, 1926176-184iti tadvacanat sadyo rosarunitalocanah sasainyo niragad raja nihantum salivahanam/ pratisthan-〓 samasadya vikramadityabhubhuii ksanaim tisthati sainyena bhagnas toranamalikah/ atrantaresametya'su pauraih parivrtah sisuh alabdhasaranas tasya sesam pitaram asmarat/ tena kridakr-tamn sarvam gaiavaipadatikam mahapralayasamtrasasamnaddham abhavad balam*snip*so 'pi jangamatam apa tena 'sau salivahanah/ tato yuddham avartista sainyayor ubhayor apifvikramarkabalam sesapresita jihmaga yayuh/ plustam tan manusam sainyam asivasavisagninakva divyasattvah phaninah svalpapranah kva manusah/20)abhayadattasri(c.11,ccturusitisiddhaprayrtti:北京.rgyud-"grel lu.2oa-bslob dpon gyis nga 'phags pa klu sgrub yin te khyod khyis ngo shes sam gsungs pas. gtamnithos te ngo mi shes zhus so. slob dpon gyis ba lang rdzi de la khyod khyis nga chu las bsgral baitngan pa ci dgos pa gter ba yin no. zhes gsungs pas. ba lang rdzi na re. bdag la rgyal po 'ongba'i thabs gcig zhu zer nas. slob dpon gyis sa phyogs de na shing sa' la'i sdong po gcig 'dug pala chu stor bas shing de de ma thag glang po cher gyur nas rgyal po"ibzhon pa byas. dmag tsogsdgos zhu ba la glang po ches 'khun pa na dmag 'ong ba yin gsung ba de bzhin du byung ste.rgyal po'i ming sa" la bha ndha zhes bya la btzun mo'i ming si nd'i zhes bya bar gyur to. gnasgrong khyer bha hi ta na zhes bya ba'i yul khyad par 'phags pa cig grub ste. rgyalpo la khral 'jalba'i grong khyer 'bumtso brgyag cu rtza bzhila dbang byed pa'i rgyal por byas nas.〓1)prabandhakosaofraiasekharasuri, edited by jina vijaya: singhi jain ser.(dhisthatasinnghiJauna jnanapitha.193)84dankaparvate surastrabhusanasatrunjayagirisikharaikadesarupe rajaputraranasimhasya bhopalan-amnim putrim tupalavanyasampurnam pasyato jatanuragasya tamm sevamanasya vasukinagasyaputro nagariiunanama jatah/ sa ca janakena putrasnehamohitena sarvasam mahausadhinamphalani mulani dalani ca bhojitah/ tatprabhavena sa mahasiddhibhiralaikrtah siddhapurusa itivikhyatah/ prthvim vicaran prthvisthanapattane satavahanasya rajnah kalagurur jatahf22)phyllis granoff, "jain biographies of nagariuna : notes on the composing of a bioraphy inMedieval India", monks and magiciams : religious biographiesi(mosaic press,1988).45-66
23)tisamudatoyapitavahana24)l.joshi, "life and times of madhyamika philosopher nagariuna", mahabodlhi7-(65
The japanese association of Indian and Budhist Studies42-49
K.v. ramanan, nagurjiuna's philosophy,as presemted in the muhaprajnaparamitasastra (motilalBanarsidass,1966)25-30<key words) harsacarita, vikramacarita, prabandhakosa(Researcher, rengei institute of buddhist studies)財団法人仏教伝道協会英訳大蔵経翻訳叢書VoLUME1
(正法眼藏第一巻)
translatedby Gudo nishiiima & chodo cross(Reprint of the book published by windbell publications in19.B5変形判・定価6,500円
