The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudieSon the authorship of the nyayakalika againMAruhiroshi
1.introductionTo the author of the nyapamaniarinM), jayanta bhatta (the latter half of the gth cen-ury),is attributed the nyaykalikunKali), a concise digest of the sixteen core top-ics (sodasapadarthatattva) of the nyaya System nyoyasostra). The jain philosophical workSyadvadaratnukara quotes a dozen of verses from j's "pallava" (presumably the "nyoaya-pallava" in its full form of the title), evidently another nyaya work which was lost 1). it maybe interesting to consider whether j composed this trilogy himself, namely "acluster offlowers of nyay" nyayamanjari),〓atwig oyy" nyayapallaua) and"a bud ofnyay"(nyayakalikz ), in view of the fact that he refers to the whole nyaya system as a giant tree.But we have no information available about the "pullad"exccpt a few citations from itmentioned above. moreover the authenticity of the nkali still remains to be established.ln marui [2Isurveyed the previous studies on the authorship of nkali to showwhat problems lie before us and tried to make a step further toward the solution. but asdezso [24] rightly demonstrates, we have to get over the textual problems that blockour pathThe only printed edition of NKali3)presents a lot of "dubious" reading:as well as a lacuna at the end of the text. moreover, it must be admitted that the previousstudies inchuding that of mine have remained rather superficial in the sense that much con-sideration has not been given to the content of the text itself. the present paper is aimed atshedding a new light on the authorship of nkali by utilizing several manuscripts of nkalias well as examining the content of the text to a certain extent.2.how does nkali begin andhow does itend? svariant readings amongmanuscriptsA. manuscripts ofnkalThe new catalogus catalogorum, vol.1o, madras 1978, informs us under "nyayakuliku
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies〓r sodasapadurthatattva"by jayantabhatta (p.241) that there exist a dozen of manuscriptsof Nkali. The manuscripts I have gained access to are the following four, the fourth ofwhich does not seem to be listed in the above catalogue of catalogues:①bandharkaroriental research institutei).no.386of 187-76.sarada (abbreviated as "Ms.1")②bori, no.88of 1875-76, devanagari (abbreviated as "Ms.2")③bori, no.8of1875-76, sarada (abbreviated as "ms.3")④benares hindu university,328405,devanagari(abbreviated as "ms.4"), the very manuscript that dezs4mentions (introduction, pp.vii-vili, fn.17).In addition the beginning and ending portions of another manuscript of nkali are acces-sible as they are given in the catalogue pattanasthaprocyajainabhandagariyagranthasnci,part 1, by b. bhattacharya (general editor), gaekwad's oriental Series lxxv, baroda1937,pp.55-56(abbreviated as "Ms.5").b. tThe benedictory verse (s) (mangula.Jbegins his nMby offering the following three benedictory vetses to sambhusiva.bhavaniarvati) and ganadhipati (Ganesa) respectively:(Mgl> namah sasvatikanandajnanaisvaryamayatmane /saikalpasaphalabrahmastambarambhaya sambhave //Mg2>namamiyamininathalekhalankrtakuntalambhavanim bhavasantapanitvapanasudhanadimm〓g3> surasurasiroratnamaricikhacitanghraye /ighnandhakarasuryaya ganadhipataye namahThe printed edition of nkali puts (gl> as the only benedictory verse with "-sakala-"in place of " -saphala-", the reading which is attested to by the sole extant commentaryNyoyamaniarigranthibhanga. butas dezs [24] reveals, Ms.4 oes notcontain gl),but the text begins with g3>. moreover, it is very interesting to note that a benedictoryverse totally different from gl> is dedicated to pinakinsiva) in ms.5 (as the only man-gla-sloka), Ms.1(followedby g3>)and ms.3 (evidenttly added later in the upper right marginofthe relevant side of the first folio, preceded by <l) in the upper margin nearby, with (3> putproperly in the text).The verse runs as follows.<Mg4> nanah svamayamahatmyadarsitanekamurtaye/ajnataparamarthaikasvarupaya pinakinef
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies●printed ed: (mgl>●ms.1: (m3>ms.5: (mg4)〓ms.3: <mg3>(in margin: (ml)g4>)ms.2,ms.4 (m3.although i have only four (or five, as far as the beginning and ending portions are concerned)available manuscripts and have utilized them just partially, a casual glance at them obvi-ously shows us that it is not proper or even dangerous to discuss the authorship of nkal:by using only the printed edition. the (mgl> that the printed edition contains is not foundin the text of any manuscript except in a margin of Ms.3.although it is not possible todraw a conclusion at the present stage of my research, it seems quite probable that the(Mg4) belonged to the original nkali, because it is not shared with nmlike (mg4) andalso because it is found in the ms.l, which seens most reliable to me among four avail-able manuscripts in so far as i have consulted them. but at presentitis not certain whether<Mg3> did follow (mg4) in the original orit was merely a later interpolation.at any rate it may safely be said that the discovery of a new benedictory verse to sivahas greatly weakened the possible argument against j's authorship that someone else whowrote nkali borrowed abenediction fromnMinorder to make it look like j's work.C. how to fill the lacuna in the closing wordswith the help of ms.4dezs 4]improved the closing portion ofthe text, filling thelacuna between " etcf ad sodsa-in the printed edition.ity etad aprabhavitasvamatabhedam akrtaparamataksepam sodlasapadorthatattvam balavyutpat-taye kathitom/aiutarasanisyandum anabhivyaktasaurabhamnyayasya katikamatram jayantah paryadidrsatbut we find a few variants for "aprabhavitasvamatabhedom""in other manuscripts.Ms.1:apratonitasvamatabhedam ms.5 apratonitanijadarsanamMs.2and ms.3aprabhovitamiiadursanam Ms.4aprabhaitasvamatabhedonThe reading "apratanita-" seems much more suitable either to "-yvamatabhedam" or〓- nijadarsanam" than the wording "aprabhovita-", for we see a relevant expression "npratorpyate"" used in nM to mean "let us not go into any more details (, otherwise we wouldgo too far beyond the proper range of our discipline of nyaya" or "let us refrain from extending ourdiscussion any further (, because that would cause a prolix manner of treatment)".one instance
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesnMI, p82.15-16 etac c sastruntare (imamsuisustre) vistarato nirmitam/ ioyasastre.〓 vitanyamanam asmakm aantaravicarapacalatum aiskarotiti na pratomyate/4It may not be so easy to decide betweensvcmatabhedcm" and〓niiadarsanam,butthe former seems preferable not merely because Ms.1 supports it, but also because the6-svamata-" in it would make a happy contrast with the " -paramata-"" in the compound thatimmediately follows it.The choice of " apratanitasvamatabhedum" may lead us to translate the last sentencebut one as follows: "Thus the essence of each of the sixteen core topics (of nyaya system)has been described without going into differences of opinion among us (naiyayikas) orcriticizing opinions of opponent Systems". The statement that refers to the existence ofdifferences of opinion within nyaya School at the end ofa small handbook would perhapssound rather strange unless it were made by a liberal thinker such as J, who gives us excep-tionally rich information about controversies among naiyayikas, between "acuryah" and" pyakhyoturah"in particular.3.characteristic explanations and expressions common to both nkali and nMa. reference to the validity of other religious scriptures (gamantarani)I nM Jayanta dedicates four chapters ( from ch. 3 to ch.6),i.e. two-thirds of the wholepramana portionof nM (twelve chapters), to sabda-pramana, whereas less thanone page is given to the same topic in nkali (twenty-seven pages) according to the printeded. if we can say that nM contains striking parallels verbally or semantically withagreater part of this passage of nkali (pp.3.17-4.14), it never means that as few as twenty-two lines of nkali represent the essence of the whole sabdapramana section of nMina proportionate manner. on the contrary, it seems that in nKali the principal focus is onexplaining the extrinsic nature of the validity or authority (paratahpramanya) of verbal tes-timony sabca), the validity ofa verbal statement including the vedic scriptures is not self-evident, but rests on the fact that it is spoken by a trustworthy speaker aptoktatua) or bythe omniscient Godin case ofthe vedas,But what forms the most conspicuous feature of the passage would be the last sentence:vedaydd agamantarany api tanmulutydvedamulatvad) aptapranitatvad wa pramanamiti vedtitavycmNKali, p.4.12-14)〓it must be known to be true that other religious scriptures area source of valid knowledge because they are grounded on the vedas or because they are written by
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesa reliable author.").Evidently J was greatly interested in the question of what could be therational ground for the authority ofreligious scriptures in general. The central theme of hisphilosophical drama agamadcmbara is the description of various debates and dialoguesamong philosophers or theoreticians of different religious backgrounds with regard to jus-tification of the authority of religion(s). The drama has its climax in the scene in whichaveteran logician of nyaya presents a series of his arguments for demonstrating the validityof all religions. in nM, too, j refers to the same arguments ).what is more important, jadduces alternative reasons for the validity of religious scriptures other than the vedas, hedoes not stick to the nyaya position of maintaining the logical reason of aptoktatva, butalso admits the Mimamsa doctrine of vedamulatva).From whatis stated above, it may be concluded that the last sentence of nkali is clearlyindicative of two distinguishing characters of j, i.e. a highly liberal attitude toward themultiplicity ofreligious traditions and such a close connection or even sympathy with mi-mamsa doctrines as wouldbe quite unusual with orthodox naiyayikas.b. soteriologicalimplication ofthe artha as anobjectof knowledge (prameya)1.close correspondence of nkali with nM.with regard to the " obiects of senseorgans]"([indripa-]artha) as the fourth item of the twelve "obiects of knowledge" (pre-meya), Nkali starts its explanation with the sentence "gandharasarup*sparsasabdah(mss.1,2,-sabdasparsah, ed.) prthipyadiguna indriyorthah", which is substantially thesame with the nyayasutra(nS)1.1.14gandharasarupasparsasabduh prthivyadigunus tadar-thuh), and after a few lines it closes the passage as follows.Nkali, p.6.16-20 ta ime bhogya indriyartha bamdhahetopa iti mamuksuna heycdy api tadus-raysyouayauino dravyasya guncntaronamparimomnddinomn karmanas c ragakuranata vidyata evtathopi gundhadayah pradhanyenasaktihetava iti heyotoyyaita ss.1, 2,3,4heyatayaiva, ed.)nirdistah
The idea is that, although the five obiects of sense-organs do not cover all the causes ofbandage or attachnnent, they are cxclusively listed innS1.1.4because they are the causesprincipally. we find an exactly simnilar statementin nM.In the relevant passage of nM(i, pp.381.5-386.10), j first quotes the nS1.1.14and thenenters into a preliminary explanation of this sutra, ending with the statement: te cmi gn-dhadayah indriyartha bhogyas santah saktihetavah smsaradraghimanam avahantiti heya-
The uapaneSe ASSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieStaya bhovayitavya p.381.15-16).hereafter begins the controversy on the meaning of thesutra with a special reference to the interpretation of the compound " prthipy adigunah".according to the opponent, the sutra should be understood in such a way as it may coverall the causes of sensuous attachment, including other kinds of qualities (guna ) such as thenumber (samkhya ) of black hair of a woman as well as the size (parimana) of her breast, orher amorous way of movement (karman),for this purpose some opponents dare to offera dvandva interpretation for the compound (prthivyadini ca guncs ceti), according to whichthe "prthivyadigunuh" would mean both the (three sensible) substances beginning with theearth (prthivyadi) and various kinds of (sensible) properties in its widest sense (gunah) in-cluding not only general qualities such as anumber, but also movements or even universals(samanya)7).
j rejects this interpretation, taking the compound as a tatpurus (prthivyadinam gunah)To answer the opponent's criticism, he gives the same explanation as we saw above inNkali:
〓ge
NMi,p.83.1-4: ydpy api dravyakarmasamanyanam anyesam smkhyyaparimanudigununam〓sty eg saktihetuta, tathopi pradhonyena gundhadincm es drsyate /a hi rupddinirapeksasytavysy samkhyddeh sumanyav saktihetutvam samcstiti rupudaya eva mukhym ragakarq-ncm/
certainly, these verbal or semantic similarities between Nkali and nM might not war-rant the common authorship. but we should note in this connection some evidences tosuggest a shift of the meaning of the "objects of sense organs" as a prameya from soterio-logical to epistemological or ontological implication in later periods.2.aconceptual shift from soteriological to epistemological or ontological. it is wellknown that the tarkabhosa of kesavamisra〓)(the middle of the 13th century), a representa-tive compendium of the syncretic nyaya-vaisesika, incorporates the six or seven padr-thcs of the vaisesika Svstem into the nvava framnework of the * arthd"a one of the twelveprameyas. here the concept of the "artha" functions as a bridge between Nyaya andVaisesika systems, having lost its specific soteriological significance:i)arthoh st padarthah/teca dravyagunakarmasamanyavisesasamavayp25.10-11)〓) idanim nisedhamukhapramonagamyo 'bhavarupah saptamah padarthah pratipcdyate/. devam arthah wrakhyotih.37.5)on the other hand. very little attention has been paid to the treatment of the same
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesprameya in acentury earlier compendium of nyaya, the tarkikarak accompaniedby the autocommentaty sarasamgraha (s)), written by varadaraja (the middle ofthe 12thcentury)).he defines the fourth prameya "artha"" as the objects that can be grasped bysense-organs (TR, v.29a: arthoh syur indriyagrahyoh) instead of the "objects of sense organs"(indriyartha). The epistemological meaning of the "artha"" has come to the front, whereasthe soteriological significance has been put into the background. v enumerates all the per-ceptible entities according to the terminology of vaisesika ontology in his correspondingcommment on it:TRSon tR, v.29a, p.124atrendriyagruhya evarthatvena vivaksith/ te c dravyesu prthivyadayaaatrarah atm c gurutuadharmodharmasumskarapyatirikig vinsatir gunuh/ pancopi karmomi/ s-manyam samayayo 'bhovas cbut it is noteworthy that after the description of nyaya's twelve prameyas, v introducesthe question why the author of nS did not define other prameyas, ie. the six padcrthas ofvaisesika. in reply v states at v.(TR,p.130)mokse saksad ananigatud aksapodair na laksitamtantrantaramusorena satkam dravyadini laksyate/3on the one hand vexplains that aksapada did not define the six padarthcs because theyare not directly useful for the liberation mokya, nihsreyasa), but on the other hand he admitsthat they are indirectly useful and goes on to define six or seven padarthas of vaisesika asa appendix to the treatmentof nyaya'spremeyas:TRSon tR, v.33,p.13-8satyam dravyainy api nihsreysopayogini vicyante, tani ty uhapyamihsreyasanangatid aksapaca na laksayom cakruh/vayam tu tesam apiparamparaya tadupayogostiti kunadatantram anusrtya lakyancm acaksmaha ityIn short v's explanation of nyaya's artha as a prameya seems to represent a sott oftransitional stage of the conceptual transfotmation. although v retains the soteriologicalneaning of the prameyas as a whole, he understands the fourth prameya not simply as the"indriyartha"", but as the "indripagrahya". he enumerates five kinds of substances, twentykinds of qualities, etc. , not because they are the causes of attachnent, but because they areperceptible inriyagrahya). however, unlike kesavamisra he does not go so far as to incor-porate the whole padurthas of vaisesika into nyaya's " arthd".〓.an archaic character of nkali nkali and nM have the same idea of the "arthd" asthe fourth prameya. according to both, they are five objects of five sense organs, ie. smell,
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStstudiestaste, color, touch and sound. they are mentioned innS1.1.14, because they are the prin-cipal causes of the sensuous attachment or bondage that will tie us to the transmigratoryexistence. This sort of soteriological implication of the artha seems to have faded away inlater times. it does not seem very probable that someone else composed nkali by extract-ing proper sentences from nM long after j, when the description of Nkali would be tooold-fashioned.4.conclusion
From what I have stated above, i conclude that we may reasonably accept j's authorshipof nkali unless we find any strong counter-evidence in future1).(abbriviations and selected bibliography)NMyyamaniari, vol.1, mysore 196.nM〓yayamaniari, vol.2,mysore 1983.NKaliyayakaliku. jurnal of indticm d bud-dhist studties. csaba dez[h ado cbouf religiolay sanskrit libraty, book ex-tras) on the website, http:kwww.claysanskritlibrary.org/ extras.php (esp., "introduction".k.Kataoka [2critical edition of the dgamapramayc section of bhatta jayanta's nyoyaman-〓ari", the memoirs ofthe institute oforientol culture(『東洋文化研究所紀要』),no.146,2004,pp.(75).k.h. potter[19]yclopedia of indihilosophies, vol.2,princeton:delhi. h. Marui [2me remarks on jayanta's writings: is nyayakalika his authenticwork?〓ithe way to liberations indological stucfies injapanino volumes, japanese studies onSouth asia no.3, vol. i, new delhi, pp.91-106.v. raghavan [19ntroductionto agama-dambara, otherwise called snmatanataka of jayanta bhatta, ed. by v. Raghavan and anantalalThakur, darbhanga, pp.i-xxix.1)For the issue of j's works, see marui [2.i think i showed a sufficient argumnent fothe distinctness of the "pallad from nM in my japanese article " jayanta bhatta's pallavccited in jain literature" in『加藤純章博士還暦記念論集アビダルマ仏教とインド思想』abhidharmna and indicn thought. essaysihonor of professr doctor junsho kato on hissixtieth birthduy),春秋社,2000,pp.445-4612)introduction, pp. vii-viii,n.17.In this connection i thank dr. dezso for his being so carefulas to suggest the wrong omission of "kathitam" after "balavyutpattaye" on marui [2],p.94.12.in addition, " sodsa-" on the same line is a misprint of " sodsa-".3)ed. ganganatha jha, princess of wales Sarasvati bhavana texts, no.17, benares1924)for this passage, see my japanese atticle " does jayanta refer to his own work as sastruntora""in the nyayamaniari?", jbs4-2,1999,pp. pp.).The other known instances of "npratanyate"' are on nMi,p.158.7-8,p.2595,p.591.1.5)nMi, pp.640-649.7. see w. halbfass, indtia cd europe, sUNY,1988,p.3,p.56,n.
he japanese association of indian and udchist studiesfisiponiokkuosol aoni eshexseciorimincituisportion (kataoka [2004],pp. (0)-(175)).thisporion (katoka [2004],pp.(60)-(175) meagamoprimaya section ofNM inchndes〓edmkataoka [2004]p.(10)2aa kmasmakmm anthn〓ceseseoe
Yee onmlp.64981kaaoka [2004,p.17(116).
8)poona onental series no.17,2n ed.99)reprint fiom thepndi, varanasi9eovisceieus gins ygscclhontliouldpot afiordo pesetmycricsm ofthe agmeneer394-395).
〓emisrdbye -cei sc (c202)(key words) nokiko, ayana bhata, authoship(professor, the universiy of tokyo)
