The  uapaneSe sSociation ofindian and buddhiStStudiesThe interpretation of Shi-mo-he-v-un(釈摩訶衍論)ofSaisen(済暹)seen mainly with ben-ken-mitsu-mi-kvo-ron-ken-ko-sho(辨顕密二教論懸鏡抄)ToyoshIMa YugoIntroduction
shi-mo-he-ycn-lun is one of the annotated books of d-cheng-qi-xin-un(大乗起信論),and describes the work of nagarjuna. it is a forgery, and thought to be approvedby chinaor the silla kingdom in the first half of the eighth century. da-cheng-qi-xin-lun-y-ji(大乗起信論義記)written by Fa-chang (643-712,法蔵)and da-cheng-qi-xin-un-yi-shu(大乗起信論義疏)written by Yuan-shao (617-686,元曉)are famous as the annotated books o〓-cheng-qi-xin-iun. shi-mo-he-yam-lun is also seen as an influence o -cheng-qi-xin-lun-yi-ji and is considered to be a annotated book of the kegon study. however, shi-mo-he-yn-lun sets up anew structure of 33types of dharma and gates (fa-men,法門)and thebul-cr-no-hen-yan (the absolute teaching of budcha,不二摩訓行),for example. These are theoriginal interpretations not seenin-cheng-qi-xin-lun. in japan, kukai (774-835,空海)valued this work and it came to occupy an important position in the Shingon study.Saisen(済暹,1025-1115,who was the monk of ninna-ii(仁和寺)temple at the end of the heianera) also treated shi-mo-he-yan-lu as an authentic work written by nagariuna. he wrotethe annotated books on the shaku-ma-ka-e-yon-ketsu-gi-ha-nan-e-shaku-sho(釈摩詞衍論決疑破難会釈抄)and Shaku--yyu-gi-bun-shaku(釈論立義分釈).iwrote the thesisonceming shaku-ron-ryu-gi-bun-shakuin).however, there is a lot of other saisen'swriting. The whole image ofthe interpretation of saisen's shi-mo-he-y-lun is not clearMoreover, at the end of the heian era, the systemmatization of the tendai study had beeralmost completed by annen41-2,安然),however, the systematization was late in theShingon study. and the system of the shingon study was attempted while receiving annnen'sinfluence. saisen was the pioneer and the trial and error process is witnessed in his inter-prctation. in this thesis, i verify ben-ken-mnits-i-kyo-ke-kyo-sho , and the contradic-tions between this and other writings is clarifiled. this comparison will clarify his pioneer's
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesThe interpretation of shi-mo-he-yan-lun(釈摩詞衍論)of saisen(済遲)seen mainly with ben-ken-mitsu-mi-hyo-ron-ken-kvo-sho(辨顯密二教論懸鏡抄)(y. toyoshMa)character.
.the quotation of shi-mo-he-yn-lunien-ken-mitsu-mi-hyyo-rons〓 en- ken-mitsu-ni-kyo-ron, kukai tried to clarify that the difference between esotericBuddhism(密教)and other foims of buddhisms(顕教)are remarkable, but esoteric bud-dhism is supreme. for confirmation, he discusses many esoteric buddhism sutrcs, amongother things. shi-mo-he-yc-n is one of the evidences. the quotation part of Shi-mo-he-y-n divides into two sections. This section consisting of fivetypes ofwords(五種言語),two types of names(二種名字),and ten states of minds(十種心量)is taken upin the latterhalf. i would like to witness the inteipretation of the all-one mind(多一心)and the one-one mind一心)inten states of minds. The ten states of minds given by shi-mo-he-ya-luninvolve the five sensoty organs (eye, ear, nose, tongue, body) and five minds (consideration,manas, alaya-vijnana, the all-one mind, the one-one mind). Since the eight states ofminds are thesame as the eight recognition theories among these, the details ate omitted. however, theninth mind and the tenth mind include the original theory of shi-mo-he-yn-un, as the fol-lowing explains.The all-one mind is called yi-qie-ji-yi yi-xin (the one mind has the feature that all minds arene mind,-一切即一一心)and the one-one mind is called yi-ii-yi yi-xin (the one mind has thefeature that an individual mind is one mind,一即一一心).these explanations are raised in theinterpretation section of the second volume for the analysis of the two types of dharma.These are the san-zi-mahavana (mahayana that divides into three parts,三自摩詞行)and theyi-ti-mahayana (mahayana that was integrated into one,一体摩訶衍).In shi-mo-he-yn-lun,the one mind is divided into two stages and, in addition, it divides from the viewpoint ofthe change gate(生滅門)and the truth gate(真如門)into two. These two mahavana cor-respond to the change gate and the truth gate of the second stage. therefore, the alias ofthesan-zi-mahayana corresponding to the change gate is the all-one mind, and the alias of theyi-ti-mahayana corresponding to the truth gate is the one-one mind.Though the truth is assumed to be verbalized and not to be perceivable in buddhismoriginally, it is assuned that it is expressed and perceivable in shi-mo-he-yan-lun. The fivetypes of words, two types ofnames, and ten states of minds explain this. in this interpreta-tion the one-one mind expresses the truth, whereas the all-one mind cannot.conversely, shi-mo-fhe-yn-lun explains the bu-er-mno-hen-van is the absolute buddha's
The  uapaneSe sSociationofIndian and BuddhiSStudiesthe interpretation of shi-mo-he-yan-iun(釈摩詞衍論)of saisen(済暹)seen mainly with ben-ken-mitsu-mi-kyo-ron-ken-kyo-sho(辨顕密二教論懸鏡抄)(y. toyoshMateaching which is irrelevant to indrya(機根).it is a concern whether the truth is the sameas the bu-er-mo-hen-yan. This problem cannot be answered clearly from the text, and theinteipretation is also a point of contention between researchers. in the structure of the 33types of dharma, these becomme the mind of the second stage. From the opinion of whetherthis relates to the truth. these two minds might relate to the bu-er-mo-hen-yan, if it isthought that the bu-er-mo-hen-yan is the same as the truth. in short, these two minds divideinto the two types of classifications, the type seen from the truth and the type seen ffom thestructure of3types of ddharma.Kukai thought the bu-er-mo-hen-yan to be related to the truth and interpreted esotericBuddhism as the bu-er-mo-hen-yan. he thought that it was interpreted to correspond to theabsolute bu-er-mo-hen-yan, esoteric buddhism, and related the one-one mind to this. ku-kai considered that there is a gate to the absolute bu-er-mo-hen-yan and that the gate is theone-one mind. This interpretation was disregarded in the structure of33types of dharma,and it intluenced the following Shingon study. naturally, saisen also has succeeded kukai'sinterpretation. however, it comes to face the interpretation of the mind of the second stagethat kukai disregarded when Saisen annotates shi-mo-he-yan-lun. both of these two inter-pretations are used when his understanding of shi-mo-he-y'n-lun is observed, and a con-tradiction is created. i would like to clarify this point.2.the interpretation of the all-one mind and the one-one mind in ben-ken-mitsu-mi-kv-ron-ken-kyo-sho:〓nen-ken-mitsu-mi-kyo-ron-ken-kyo-sho there is one sentence,"多一識心者是三自-心本法也此即心生滅門之所依與行與相如來藏是也",2)The all-one mind is describedhere as the san-zi-yi-in mahayana (Mahayana that divides into three parts on one mind,三自一心摩詞衍).the san-zi-vi-in mahayana is located in the mind of the first stage. therefore, itisunderstood that itis sincerely located in the highest rank, and the interpretation is differentfrom shi-mo- he-yan-lun.saisen describes the one-one mind, 〓一一識心者是即示不二性徳海法也"3).the one-one mindis related to the the bu-er-mo-hen-yan. This interpretation is the same as kukai's.Saisen located the all-one mind to the san-zi-yi-in mahayana and the one-one mind tothe bu-er-mo-hen-yan. The inteipretation of kukai's Ben-ken-mitsu-ni-kyo-fon is thoughtto be a feason. in ben-ken-mitsu-ni-kyo-ron, kukai located the kegon study below esoteric
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe interpretation of shi-mo-he-yan-imn(釈摩詞衍論)of saisen(済遅)seen mainly with ben-ken-mitsu-mi-kyo-ron-ken-kyo-sho(辨顕密二教論懸鏡抄)(y. toroshimaBuddhism, and considered the kegon study to be the san-zi-yi-in mahayana. therefore,the all-one mind corresponds to the san-zi-yi-in mahayana because the one-one mind cor-tesponds to the bu-er-mo-hen-yan. next, i willexplain the interpretation of these two statesof minds of ryu-gi-bun-shaku (the writing of saisen), andto compare their different points.3.The interpretation ofthe all-onemind andthe one-onemindinryu-gi-bun-shakultis explained"但第二重能所四法以此二門爲所依一心法謂多一心一一心是也"4and"第二重所依多一心一一心之二法"8)by ryu-gi-bun-shaku. it is understood that theall-one mind and the one-one mind are located in the second stage of the one mind. There-fore, it can be said that saisen's interpretationiryu-gi-bun-shaku is the same as shi-mohe-y-lun.
we observe the relation to iu-iju-shin(theminds classified into ten stages,十住心)continuously described in ben-ken-mitsu-ni-kyo-ron. here, the point to interpret the all-one mnindas ichi-do-mu-i-shin(一道無為心)is given attention. Saisen interprets ichi-do-mu-i-shin asthe second stage because "kai-san-xian-yi"(開三顕一)is explainedia-hua-jing(法華経)and there is no content of san-da(三大)in the first stage. itis understood that the relatiorbetween tri-yana and eka-yana is made repeatedly in the relation between all and one inthe mind. when you see the explanation concerning the five questions and answers(五重問答)and16dharma described hereto, the ohe-one mind is allocated in the third questionand answer as weil as the all-onemind. These two minds are the gates to the san-zi-vi-invahayana because the gate of the first stage is coiresponding to the dharma of the secondstage. The interpretation of saisen's duplicity is the second stage.To summarize, the influences of the five questions and answers are received, and the all-one mind and the one-one mind are one set located below the san-zi-vi-in mahayana.Conclusion
the all-one mind and the one-one mind explained by shi-mno-he-yan-lun are located inthe second stage, when observed from the structure of3types of dharma. each mind dealswith the change gate and the truth gate. kukai thought the truth to be the bu-er-mo-hen-yan. For the one-one mind he made it correspond to the bu-er-mo-hen-yan. conversely,he made the san-zi-yi-in mahayana correspond to the kegon study. kukai's interpretationdeviates from the understanding of shi-mo-he-yan-lun. This intenpretation doesn't become
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesthe interpretation of shi-mo-he-yan-iun(釈摩訶衍論)of saisen(済遲)seen mainly with ben-ken-mitsu-mi-kyo-1on-ken-kyo-sho(辨顕密二教論懸鏡抄)(y. toyoshima)a problem alone, however contradiction is created when cotrespondence is requested be.tween shi-mo-he-yn-lun and his intetpretation. saisen was exactly confronted with thisproblem. saisen wrote ryu-gi-bun-yhcku a an annotated book o hi-mo-he-yn-lun. inhis book, he interpreted the all-one mind and the one-one mind as the second stage. Thisrelates to kukai"s interpretation of the five questions and answers and was cincided withthe understanding of Shi-o-e-ycn-lun. Saisen wrote the annotated book on kukai"s ben-ken-mitsu-ni-k-yon. in this book, he interprets the all-one mind as the san-zi-yi-in ma-hayana and the one-one mind as the the bu-er-mo-hen-yan. this interpretation coirespondsto the interpretation of kukai. however. it is different from the intetpretation of shi-mo-he-y-lun. in conclusion, he cantot solve this problem as long as the two books are con-pared. this frankly shows that saisen is a pioneer. however, it is necessary to think aboutother writings for saisen to be able to finally solve this problem. I propose to address thisin futute tasks.1)toyoshima, y. [2],saisen's Interpretation of the shi moheycn lun focusing on the interretation of funi-mon, journal ofindicn ad budmist studies 14-2)2)ben-ken-mitsu-ni-ko-ron-ken-kyo-sho. 77,p.4,c21-223)ben-ke-mitsu-ni-kyo-ron-ken-kyo-sho, 〓77,p47,3-44)ryu-gi-bun-shaku, t69,p.577,b11-135)ryu-gi-bm-shaku, t69,p.577,b14-156)ryn-gi-bun-shaku, t6,p.579,c10-137)ryu-gi-bun-shaku, t69,p.580,b-10(key word)済暹,釈摩訓衍論,懸鏡抄,多一心,一一心(Graduate student, University of tokyo)
