The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieS〓n kukai's "Mysteriously arranged mind"Sania juRkovic"Mysteriously arranged mind"(秘密荘厳心),the tenth abode in kukai's works himitsumamdora juiushinron and hizo hoyaku, represents the state of awakening of the shingonpractitioner. in this last abode, kukai attempts to indicate the ground common of all varie-ties of mind. he tefers to it as a return to the primordial state of one's mind(白心源底),which manifests in the form of an infinite number of the four kinds of mandals and thefour wisdom seals. he then introduces the way of Shingon practice as a distinguishingfeature of the tenth abode. kukai gives the reader a glimpse of the meaning of the yogicprocess of "mystical identification"(samaya) through the coirespondences he forms inthe text, such as the establishment of relationships between sanskrit syllables and variousleachings. based on this relation, he generalizes his esoteric viewi on other teachings intro-duced in the previous abodes.Kukai's tenfold model is textually based primarily on the mchavairocanabhisambodhisitra and putixi iun(菩提心論)of the vairasekhara tradition. particularly, the tenth abodeof himitsu mamdara juiushimron has a special emphasis on the chapter intercorrespond-ence with the result of the hundtred letters(百字果相応品)from the mahovairocanasutra,whereas the tenth stage of hizo hoyaku extensively quotes the part on "bodhicitta of eso-teric samadhi"(三摩地の菩提心)of putixi lum.The tenth abode has a qualitatively distinct place within the model of the ten abodes.whilst at the sane time it is also related to the eighth and ninth abodes. each of these threeabodes reveals another important aspect of "knowing one's own mind as it really is"(如実知自心).all three are considered to be related to the attainment of the state of the sixthfearlessness(一切法自性平等無畏),the last step in the process of the realization of empti-ness atd the establishment of fully developed bodhicitta. This paper will summarize someof the distinguishing features of the tenth abode, such as the concepts of sumoya and eso-teric samachi. at first, i will focus on kukai"'s unique svnthetical approach, which is most
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS6)〓n kukai's "mysteriously arranged mind"(s. jurkovic)clearly visible in the textof the tenth abode inhimitsu mandara juiushinron1.Synthetical approachin relation to the mind and other teachings1.1.Central to the mahovairocanasutra is the question and answer, "what is bodhi? itis to know one's own mind as it really is." this phrase is also the central topic of himitsimandara juiushinron, which kukai interprets fromtwo perspectives:This one phrase encompasses infnite meanings. vertically, it expresses depth of [the mind] intenlayers. horizontally, it indicates a vast number of meanings, equal to the number of grains of sand.In order to elaborate the vertical approach that enables himn to establish the model of tenstages, kukai uses the idea of the " evolving of the mind"(心続生),which appears in thefirst chapter of the mahavairocanasutra. This emphasis on the vertical approach is theprimary focus of hiz hoyaku. in relation to the horizontal approach, prominentinhimitsumandara jujushimron, kukai uses other chapters of the mahavairocanasutra related toyogic practice. in the textof the tenth abode, he frequently refers to the chapter intercorre-spondence with the Result of the hundred letters, quoting itno less than five times. basedon this chapter. the tenth abode is defined as the state of infinite body and mind, whichiqualitatively different ftom the previous abodes. kukai states:The two vehicles of the  five ] aggregates only' adof eradication of karma" know onlys [kindsol consciousness. The teachings of 〓others as object' and erealizing the mind' both indicate onlyeight minds. "tThe one way' and transcending no [self nature]'both know only nine [kinds of] con-sciousness. Shimohoyen un(釋摩剖衍論)explains ten consciousnesses and the king [of sutrcs]〓ahavairocanasutra explains infinite minds, consciousnesses, infinite bodies, and so on. to knowthis utmost of the body and mind [in this way]meats to realize "the mysteriously arranged abode'(秘密荘厳之住處).2)
The paragraph of the mahavairocanasutra, which kukai interprets as the horizontal ap-proach to understanding of "knowing one's own mind as it is" reads"next one seeks the state of complete enlightenment. by knowing that minds are infinite, oneknows that bodies are infinite. by knowing that bodies are infinite, one knows that wisdom is infi-nite. by knowing that wisdom is infinite, one knows that sentient beings are infinite. by knowinghat sentient beings are infinite, one knows that space is infinite." This is the horizontal meaning.〓The mahuvairocanasutra actually doesn"texplaina quantitatively infnite number of con-sciousnesses or an infinite number of minds but it does refer to a qualitatively infinite stateof mind, body, wisdom, and so on that occurs as a result of complete awakening. there-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesfore. Kukai synthesizes the two-dimensional vertical approach that differentiates betweenthe number of various kinds of consciousnesses, and the horizontal approach of a singleinfinite consciousness, thereby creating a new dimension called "the mysteriously arrangedabode." in this way, the last abode encompasses all ten kinds of consciousness, whilst atthe same time maintaining its own infinity. in relation to the definition of the mind of thetenth abode, this method of combining qualitatively different aspects may be interpreted asKukai's synthetical approach.1.2.another aspect of the synthetical approach apparent in the text of the tenth abode re-lates to kukai's final interpretation of various teachings. itis based on establishing amysti-cal correspondence between Sanskrit syllables and various teachings, again theoreticallyplaced in the context of the chapter of intercorrespondence with the result ofthe hundredletters. This chapter, namely, refers to the attainment of bodhi, attained through the recita-tion and meditation on the mantra which shines everywhere with one hundred light rays"(百光遍照真言),which is the syllable am. all knowledge (on various infinities) emanatesfrom the mantra itself. kukai quotes the beginning of the chapter related to entering intothe state ofthree scmaya, which is the core of the shingon teaching. it says.If one enters "the stage of the great wisdom initiation' of the enlightened world-honored one, hewill himself realize and abide in the state of three samayc.〓Kukai doesn't specifically mention the syllable am, but instead uses this context to intro-duce the mantra teachings on the basis ofthe twenty-nine sanskrit syllable gates(十九の字門)from the second chapter of the mahavairocanasutra.) in this way, he identifies theattainment of bodihi with the knowledge of the twenty-nine syllables. The list of the twen-ty-nine syllable gates in the mahavairocancsutra indicates that the total of all the syllablesand words arising from them cannot be ascertained (amupalabdha), as they all ultimatelycome from the syllable a, which represents original non-arising. The sutra states:what is the shingon mantra) teaching? the teaching (gate) of the syllable 〓', because all phe-nomena are originaly unarisen nutpada). The teaching of the syllable 〓ka", because activity ofall phenomena (karya) cannot be ascertained. The teaching of the syllable 〓kha', because all phe-nomena, such as space, cannot be ascertained...  the teaching of the syllable 〓s atya), becauseno truth can be ascertained in all phenomena. the teaching of the syllable "ha' (hetu ), because theauses cannot be ascertained in all phenomena.9within the context of the ten abodes, syllables are very important for kukai, as he identi-fies then with different buddhist teachings. For exammple, in the text of the seventh abode,
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesKukai correlates the syllable a with great emptiness, the bodihisattva manjusri, and theteaching of Sanlun(三論).〓in the same way, these twenty-nine syllables represent en-trances to different teachings charmaparyayas).kukai mentions twelve transformations(十二轉)of each syllable out of which the four syllables ( the first two and the last two)always indicate the initial mind of awakening(発心),the stage (s) of practice(行),therealization of bodhi(證)and the entrance to buddhahood(入),respectively.〓 For kukai,although any teachings based on words and their combinations, are unobtainable andempty, they can nonetheless heal certain illnesses and bring a practitioner to buddhahood.In the latter part of the text. kukai refers to the possible combinations of syllables, whichlead to anumber exceeding ten thousand.9 This suggests that whatever number of syllablecombinations exist, they all form the samadhi and dhurani gates of deities, and manifestvarious exoteric and esoteric teachings. with such reasoning, kukai expands his approach,developed in previous abodes, to reveal that all the teachings are essentially and practicallyequal.
Kukai assigns to the mind of the tenth abode, particularly to its expression in the fornrof dharmamandala, the knowledge of the twenty-nine syllables and their implications inrelation to the other teachings. although through the samadhis of different deities Shingonteaching embraces other buddhist teachings, it distinguishes itself from all others by re-placing common language with the language of mantras. similar to that described in1.1,but now in a different context, kukai's synthetical approach builds up the tenth abode insuch a way that it encompasses all other teachings, maintaining at the same time its ownqualitatively different dimension. samaya, esoteric samadhi and the practice of the thremysterious activities(三密行)are the key words for the tenth abode.2.esoteric samadhi and the state of samnayaKukai defines the infinite body and mind attained at " the mysterious inexhaustibly ar-ranged abode"(秘密無盡荘厳之住處)in terms of the four kinds of mandalas.〓ahavairocanasitra clarifies the realm of such infinite bodies of four kinds of mandla and be-nefits of buddha's teaching. this is mysteriously atranged, inexhaustible realm.1Seeing the world and one's own existence in teims of mandulas represents a cognitivechange appearing for the practitioner of this esoteric method. it is a result of replacingthe old static identity with a dynamic changing of roles, which, within the context of the
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies〓
Shingon teaching, corresponds to an identification with mandula deities. this process olperceiving oneself and other practitioners of any time, as the only deities that could everexisted, takes place in " this very body"(即身),after all obstructions have been removed,to the great astonishment of the practitioner himself.11in Sokushin jobutsu gi, kukai explains that awakening in "this very body" is possiblebecause of the principle of the interconnectedness of all bodies, specifically, buddha bod-ies and the bodies of sentient beings, illustrated by the simile of indra's net. within thiscontext. kukai introduces the "mantra of nonobstruction of three equals", which is actuallythe vidpa called e entry into the buddhas' samayd"(入佛三味耶持明)that is quoted in thesecond chapter of the mchavairocumcsutra:" asame trisame samaye svaha .12)as one ofthe explanations of trisame, kukai mentions equality ofthe mind, buddhas, andsentient beings. This identity of the three is essential for theoretical and practical aspects otKukai's teaching. one of the sources for this premise is the huayan view that "mind, bud-dhas and sentient beings, these three are without distinction"(心仏及衆生是三無差別).13,The mantra "entry into the buddhas' samayd"" stands as the representative mantra for thewhole system of esoteric practice. kukai mentions itin the tenth abode as well. if one canconcentrate onit, one can immediately realize identity with the buddha.The state of samaya is often translated into chinese as "equality"(平等)14),but actuallit has a wider meaning. more profoundly, it refers to the method of "mystical identificalion" of the practitioner with a reality based on some concrete thing or image. it refers tothe process of reaching a state of unity and has a similar meaning to the term yoga.theesoteric nethod described in the mahovairocunasitra is based on the process of samayo,which is, for the purpose ofrelating to it, divided into three aspects, as samoya of the body,speech and mind. the name of the tenth abode "mysteriously arranged mind" is based onsubhakarasimha's interpretation of the state of the " inexhaustible adomned treasuty of thesamaya of the body, speech and mind"(身語意平等無尽荘厳蔵)displayed by buddha infront of his audience before exposing the teaching of the mchavairocanasutra. "aranged"(荘厳)refers to the samaya of the three mysterious activities(三密)of the body, speechand mind of the practitioner, which come into intercorrespondence(相応)or " perfectalignment" with the three mysterious activities of the deity in the esoteric samadhi. afterrealization of identity based on the process of samaya, there is no longer a search for an
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSideal state. when one is in the state of alignment with one's original mind, all things cometo be in the perfect position just as they are. This refers to the "mysteriously arrangedmind"", which is actually the practical and ultimate realization of knowing one's own mindas it really is"(如実知自心).Kukai's understanding of samaya is very close to the meaning of "esoteric samadhiand specifically refers to the term "nyuga ganyu"(入我我入),a phrase he coined byimself.) The whole of the tenth stage of hizo hoyaku is a quotation on esoteric samachifoundinputixi lun. Through the realization of sumadhis of different deities, all of the prin-ciples and teachings of the previous abodes are actualized in the tenth abode.3.conclusion
Kukai's method of combining elements of a different nature and thereby obtaining an out-come of a new quality was considered in relation to his approach to the mind of the tentlabode and to his view on other teachings. This synthetical approach comprises in itself amystical aspect as it calls for certain degree of understanding of the experiential reality thatis beyond the descriptive realm of the words. if one does not understand the fact that kukaipoints to the noh-dualistic experience at the tenth abode as the result of Shingon practice,then his mystical approach, visible in various examples in the text of the tenth abode maysometimes seein to be oversimplitied or even illogical. i find it is necessary to outlineKukai's way of reasoning, which i have termed his "synthetical approach",in order tcunderstand his perspective as written from an esoteric point of view. the actual state of eethemysteriously arranged mind"" is the state of practicing samudhi, which is the reason whythe concise text of hizo hoyaku quotes the respective part ofputixi lun in its entirety. ForKukai, samcdhi refers to the state of triscmaya, the concept brought to attentioninhimitsumandora juiushinron. through the process of experiencing the realization of emptiness atthe eighth abode, thereby opening the place for the manifestation of suchness at the ninthabode, and finally experiencing the mystical process of samaya at the tenth abode, one canattain the dynamic position in the four kinds of mandalas, which characterizes the state of"awakening in this very body.1)himitsu mandara iuiushinron,  eiho kobo dishi zenshu『定本弘法大師全集2,秘密曼茶雇十住心論』(hereafter abbreviated as TZ.2, koyasan1993,pp.07-308.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies〓kukai's "Mysteriously arranged mind"(s. jurkovic)(2)Tz.2.p.308.3)ibid. quotationis from t.18,p.4b.4)ibid.
5)t181ab. on the twenty-nine syllables list see北條賢三「大日経言語形成の源流」,『インド密教の形成と展開』,法蔵館,1998,pp.189-191.6)t810ab.Tz.,pp.310-312.7)Iasimilar way, he relates the syllable sa to the "truth ofall dharmas"" and to the teaching ofliantai. ka is related to huayan teaching, ad ato faxiang teaching. tz.2,pp.238,257,271,295.
8)T.2,p.310.
9)tz.2,p.323.10)Tz,p.311,
11)one of the characterizations of the state of scmayais astonishment. See fn.14.12)Tz.3,p.8.
13)This refers to the "verses on cittamatrata""(唯心偈),in sixty volumes buddhavatamsakas-itra. t95c-466a. see chisho mamoru namai: shingonmon, The way of Shingon buddhism,Bulletin of the research institute of esoteric buddhist culture, special issue i, october-20p.285.
14)subhakarasimha refers to the four meanings ofthe word samequality(平等),vows(本誓),eliminating obstacles(除障)and astonishment(驚覚).he also states that the gateway ofsamaya(平等法門)is the main meaning of the muhavairocancsutra. t83a.15)namai chisho: searching for identityin diversity: from the viewpoint of mandala, presentedat icbs, koyasan university, septembei,p.2n printing)16)村上保壽:「空海の開題を読(5)-三味耶と入我我入」,『密教文化』209,2002<key words)秘密荘厳心,samaya,十住心Researcher. kovasan university research institute for esoteric buddhist culture )
