The  uapanese sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSMarriage ceremony of barua buddhistsin bangladeshTitu kumar barua1.IntroductionThe buddhist communities of bangladesh compare various ethnic groups. like othercommunities in bangladesh, the barua community is also observes many socio-teligiousrituals in a marriage ceremony. it is noteworthy that the socio-religious rituals of mar-riage ceremony differ from feligious community to coimmunity. Through these rituals thereligious communities convey their self identity. both social marriage and court marriageare vogue in the barua society of bangladesh. but social marriage is more popular thanthe courtmarriage 1.court marriage and divorce are extremely rare. widow-remarriage ispermissible. in the case of the coutt marriage, national law ifegulates separation or divofce.In the case of the social mamiage, usually the couple follows the social norms. both, po-lygamy and child marriage are prohibited by national law and the baruas abide by it. inter-religious marriage is socially prohibited and is extremely rare. here i shall only discuss thesocial marriage.2.Marriage ceremonyTwo systems of marriage ceremony are found in the barua society of bangladesh. ifabridegroom goes to his bride father house and the nuptial is performed there, it is calledCalanta bivaha. again, if the bride is brought to her bridegroom house and nuptial is per-formed there. it is called namamt bivaha. The later is more in vogue in the barua society.But in the muslim and hindu communities, the first one is vety common3.Theritualof bridegroom and bride selectionThe ritual in the barua community it is parents who select the pair of a bridegroom and abride. nowadays, the final selection rests with the choice of the couple, but the consent of
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist StudiesMarriage ceremony of barua buddhists in bangladesh (.k.barua)(the parents is a must. if the couple chooses each other a proposal is offered in a ceremoni-ous way. in former days this was done by a matchmaker. this basic pattern is very similarto the hindu and muslin community of bangladesh.4.The socio-popular Rules and notionssome social and popular rules and notions are observed during the marriage ceremonyAs a rule, which is followed not only by the baruas but also by other buddhists, marriageceremony cannot be held during the period of vassavasa).if marriage is held it is con.sidered as an utter violence of the rule of buddhist society3.This custom is not foundinother religious communities in bangladesh. marriage within the same blood relation is alsoforbiddenmong the baruas and hindus, marriage between close blood relations ishought to bring unhappiness to the couple and their conjugal life. so, they generally try toavoid this sort of marriage tie.Some popular notions are also observed by the baruas during the marriage ceremony. forexample, the marriage ceremony is not held on the birthday of the bridegroom or the bride.They believe that if marriage ceremony is held on the birthday brings about unhappiness inthe coniugal life of the couple. besides, in the month of kattika, paus, and caitra of ben-gali calendar usually no marriage is held. That is, if any marriage is held in the month ofKartika of bengali calendar. the new bride will need a lot of attention and special care, inthe same way as an elephant needs a lot of nutrition and vegetation, and the month of pausand caitra, marriage ceremonies will bring evil results. these beliefs also prevail in theHindu society, but notin muslims ). for a suitable match, both parties consult horoscopesby a hindu brahmin priest6).5.The ritual of engagementafter final selection the first customary ritual is engagement, which is done in a ceremmoni-ous way before marriage and called alankar-cadni. in this the bridegroom party is invitedto the house of the bride father to discuss all affairs. after discussion, the bridegroom partyoffers symbolically one finger ring, garments and other materials to the girl. The girl isadorned with these ornaments and garments and appears before the guests and conveys hergratitude. The elders of the guests bless her and the bridegroom party gives their final ap-proval for the marriage.
The  uapanese sSociation ofIndian and BuddhiStStudiesmarriage ceremony of barua buddhists in bangladesh (t.k.barua5.the obliqatory ritual of discussion with villagersafter the engagement, both the parties arrange a meeting with villagers to discuss inthick and thin about the right performance of the function. villagers do not take part in themarriage ceremony if this meeting is not held. This is called pansala. this ritual is alsocommon to all religious communities. after this in the case of the baruas marriage, parit-tas recitation is held in both the houses, in order to protect them from the evil eyes of thespirits and ghosts.7.The ritual of anointmentanointment is another obligatory ritual of marriage ceremony. this ritual is called tel-lonami. This ritual is also found in other religious commumities. This ritual is held in theboth houses of the bride and bridegroom. before the sitting for the tel-lonani the baruabride and bridegroom with few amales and females go to their local monastery separately,and worship to the buddha, burn candles and incenses, and offer homage to the bhikkhus.Then, both the boy and the girl are anointed with paste of green tummeric and bathed in aceremonious way. in the ritual, a decorated winnowing-fan filled with five green banana,five quarter seers of paddy (measuring cups), green grass, three or four pieces of green tur-meric, a stone, a ghila, a painted water jar which is filled with leaves of mango sprouts,bamboo sprouts, bo tree sprouts, mijiri sprouts, a earthen lamp, and a bud of banana treeare used. all these have a symbolic significance meaning '. first boys, then girls havingsister in law offer tel-lonani by way of touching winnowing-fan front side to the foreheadofthe bride groom one by one. the bride is offered tel-lonami in the same way in the bridehouse.
after this, the rite of the house deity is worshipped with sunned-rice, banana and somemolasses for the well being of the couples 8). then compliments are offered to the eldersafter the completion of the anointment ritual, one kind of iron-bangle is bound on thewrists of the bridegroom and the bride as a shield against of evil influences.8.The ritual for bride ReceptionThe bridegroom party is received by bride party with hulu dhvani. after reception, thebridegroom party takes seat prepared for them. Some persons of the bride side also take
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesMarriage ceremony of barua buddhists in bangladesh (k.barua)(17seats with them. Then they ate setved with sugar and betel-leaves arranged nicely on atraywhich is mutually exchanged by both the parties that signify the exchange of friendship be-tween two families and societies. now the bridegroom party will hand over everything thatthey have brought for the bride. all the items put on a tray are shown to all guests, and thewomenfolk adorn the bride with those items and then a farewell ritual is performed. somedistinguished elderly persons of the bridegroom party are invited inside the house and thefather or any near elderly relative of the bride hands over. when the bridegroom partycomes back home with the bride. the female members of the bridegroom's house cordiallyreceive her in a ceremonial way through huu dhvani.9.the marriage ceremony performed by the bhikkhusA seat is prepared colorfully decorated with flowers, festoons, balloons and other articlesin courtyard, this is called vivaha-vasara. in the vivaha-vasara bride and bridegroom siside by side with brother-in-law. each of them wears a seyayra on the head. two auspi-cious pots called mangala-ghata are placed before them. then, the bhikkhus, who areinvited to grace the marriage ceremony, perform religious rituals. They give five preceptswith three refuges, and chant suttas from holy tipitaka, those containing the duties ofhouseholders. after chanting the suttas, a sacred thread purified especially by chanting theParitta suttas is fastened to the wrists of the couple in order to protect them from the influ-ences of evil spirits.0.The Marriage ceremonyperformed byalayman after bhikkhusafter bhikkhus, a layman who can recite pali scripture well performs the marriage ritu-als. at first, the layman seeks protection of himself as well as of the couple chanting by theverse 〓 . Then, he invites the father of the bride or any representative from the bride side tohand over the bride to the bridegroom.after that the couple take refuge in the three jewels jointly and pay respect to their parentsand other elders. then the layman sprinkles water from the auspicious pitcher on the headsof the couple. Then, the layman gives some advice to the couple for the happiness of theirconjugal life along with the ten admonitions given by dhananjaya setthi to her daughtervisakhawhile she was going to her father-in-law's house.
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS11.post marriage rituals〓n the following day of the marriage ceremony, bhikkhus are entertained with deliciousfood and offered donation. ancestors are also worshiped for seeking their blessings. othe day after day the couple goes to the bride parent's house accompanied by many oth-ers. this is called mati-honduni. on the 9h day after marriage, the couple again visits thebride parents house. This function is called na-dinno. This time the bride does not comeback with her husband. She lives with her parents for some days. after a few days the son-in-law invites his wife back home. this function is called phiranys bhut. The son-in-awstays for a day or two in his father-in-law's house and then comes back with his wife. Thenanother rite is called behoi-pata, on the day of the behui-pata parents of the bridegroom,go to the bride father house enioying with the new relatives. it is establishes familiarity andclose fratetnity between the two families,12.conclusionThe ritual s of marriage ceremony of the barua community highly influenced by nationalculture. may rituals of the barua community are similar to that of other religious co-munities but there are many rituals that differ from other religious communities. itis note-worthy that nany nituals are simnilar to that of Hindu community. but the differences aredue to the religious influences. though the marriage ceremonies are considered incompletewithout the participation of bhikkhus, popular rituals play the major role in their marriageceremony and its elements. the baruas consider the marriage ceremony invalid unless themonks bless the bride and the bridegroom. They also believe that the blessings by monksensure a happy life for the new couple. another part performs of the marriage by the lay-man is a social duty and their custom.Notes
1)ifparents of both sides do not agree in themarriage then they go to the court and with the helpof lawyer they sing in stampin front of magistrate. Thus they recognized as husband and wife.n this case, they should probe that they are in the age that eligible for marriage.2)ltis may be that during the rain-retreats (for three months) bhikkhus have to live in their owrviharas, engage themselves devotedly to leamn dhamma-vinaya, discuss religious matters. so,during this period, the buddhist comnmunity strongly discourages marriage ceremonies.
The japaneSe asSociationof Indian and BuddhistStudieSMarriage ceremony of barua buddhists in bangladesh (t.k.barua)(1773)villagers do not take part if this rule is violated.4)there are, however, some stray evidences of cousin marriage. siddhartha gautama himselfmarried Yasodhara, his cousin. Thus, although this sort of marriage is allowed, it is not encour-aged nowadays.5)The origin of the practices may be that caitra is the month of revenue collection and house.holders are heavily engaged in collecting revenue of the government. The month of paus is abusy month, for it is the time of harvesting. The economy of the country regulates social lifeundoubtedly. so, wise elders of the society discouraged holding such festive ceremonies at thesebusy times.
6)all religious communities believe in horoscope.7)the green fruits are symbol of good health, green turmeric is the symbol of beauty, stone isthe symbol of firmness, earthen light is the symbol of hope, water is symbol of life and quench-ing thirst, a ghila is for gravity, and leaves within the jar are the symbol of long life.8)barua  ando, syncretismibangladeshi buddhism, nagoya,2002,p.189.9)bhadanta dharmatilak thera obirendra Mutsuddi (trans): saddharm ratnakar, rangoor1936.
10)dhammapadatthakatha, vol. ii. p.t.S., pp.466.The ten admonitions given by dhananjaya Setthi to her daughter visakha while she was goingto her father-in-law's house are: a) donot carty indoor fire outside, b) donot carry outdoor fireinside; c) give only to him who returns; d) give not him who does not returns; e) give to himretumns and also to him who does not returns; f) sit happily; g) eat happily, h) sleep happily;〓)respect the fire; j) honour the household divinities. The barua buddhists popularly followsthose ten items.bibliography
Choudhury, sukomal, contemporarybuddhismbamgladesh, atisa Memorial publishing societycalcutta.1982.Chakravatti, rasmohon, contributtionof comilla to buddhist cuture in ancient fime, comilla,1965.
quanungo, suniti bhusan, ahistory' of chittagong, vol.i, dipankar quanungo, chittagong,1988.Basu, nagendra nath, vanger jatiya itihas, raiannya,1321.chowdhury, momen, bangladesher loukik acha-amsthan: jjanmoobibaha, bangla academy,dhaka1988.
Barua & ando, syncretisminbamgladeshi budumhism, japan, 2002.roy, niharranjan, bangutir itihas, dey's publishing, calcutta,1402barua aru bikush, mahakabi asvagosh, chittagong,1993.(Graduate student, aichi gakuin university)
