The japanese asSociation of Indian and Buddhist Studies〓alavenpa:
a tamil version of valopakhyanamMIyaMoto Jo
1.introductionFrom the sangam age, tamil literature preserved its traditions in forms other than San-skrit literature. as the society and culture were affected by hinduism, tamil literature wasalso influenced by sanskrit literature. as a result, so many adaptations ffom Sanskrit litera-ture like muhabharata, ramayana, and puranas, were made after about the eleventh andtwelfth centuries. in such circumstances, the tamil version ofnL was composed. it is saidthat pukalenti, the author of nv, gained a great reputation by this new work. but in theresearch of Tamil literature, these adaptations have been looked upon as just easy versionsof Sanskrit literature and have not been paid attention to seriously. needlless to say, nv hasnever been examined in detail.The present paper is to discuss nV from the point of view of the influence of tamil lit-erature and also to examine the differences betweennV and nL,2.descriptionofnatureIn Sangam literature, there are two maior categories, Akam and puram. akam literatureis further divided into five genres (kurinci, neytal, mullai, Marutam and palai).each genre isassociated with specific themes, landscapes, plants, animals and so on. by these we can un-derstand to which genre a verse belongs. The landscapes of two genres of akam literatureare showninv, as follows.2.1marutam
I nv. the hometowns of nala and damayanti are depicted as follows.kamar kayalpuralak kavimukai nekila (nV1.12)uvalai ulunar matai mitippat tempayum matu oli nir natan Nv.31
The  uTapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhistStudiesvalaivayal vilntu ulakkumhal natan v28)Here. we can see words like kayal fish. valai fish and kuvalai flower. These are tetms todescribe the land of marutaminakam literature 12.2palai
lnnl, after nala lost everything, nala and damayanti went to the woods where thetrees grew thick and many animals were in search of prey. This reminds us of the jungle.〓n the other hand, innv, they went to the desert, as given below.nalam cer kalli vekattu aravin kanmanikal tampotiyayt tulli vekinra curamv2.79)In this verse, we must draw attention to the word "kalli'. this is a typical plant in theland of Palai. The desert with the kalli plant is used frequently to depict the land of PalaiinAkam literature 2),as shown above, the author of nv depicts nature according to the tradition of Sangamliterature.
3.description of damavantiSome descriptions of damayantiinnV are given below.cinakkatir vel kanmatavay v2.71)vallivita mellitaiyal v2.76)kortak kayarkan kotiye (v23)Itis important to note that these are typical terms to depict the beauty of womenin tamilliterature. we can see similar descriptions in sangam literature4. other points4.1modesty
InnL, although the maids of damayanti said nothing, being astonished at the beauty ofNala, only damayanti talked to him without flinching. butin nV, she also hesitated to talkto nala out of modesty3ln this scene, the words 〓karpin tal",  nanam tari" are used. These words mean "a bolt ofmodesty . it mmust be noted that there is a similar word in irukkural5.modesty is oneof the inportant female virtues in the tradition of tamil literature. hence, it is inferred thatthe author knows of the traditional concept ofmodesty vety well and adopteditinnv.
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudies4.2conversationdamayanti expressed love for nala passionately at their first meeting innL. by contrast,in nv, damayanti and nala said only a few words to each other)the leading charactersin tamil literature are generally reticent and talk not so much. we may say that such acharacteristic of tamil literature is reflected in this scene4.3night before the svayamvaralnL, after their first meeting, the day of the svayamvara was fixed. and the svayam-vata began. There was no special incident between the first meeting and the svayamvara.But the story of nv differs from that of nL, in that in nv, after damayanti talked to naladirectly, she got heavily lovesick and suffered very much for the whole night before thesvayamvara . and the next day, the svayamvara began. The scene of her lovesickness forNala is an important part of the first chapter of nv.In this scene, we can see words like the north wind, the anril bird and the sounds of thesea. al these words are typical terms in sangam literature. These words are often usedinthe poems to depict the heroine's lovesickness at night6).4.4Children
after nala was obsessedby gambling innL, damayanti sent their children to her hone-town. but there is no scene of separation. The stoty of nv, however, is different from thatof nl. after nala lost everything by gambling, he went to the desert with his wife andchildren. The children suffered in the desert. so nala ordered damayanti to send their chil-dren to her hometown. but she refused. nala taught her the importance of the children'sfeelings through the short, didactic poems. finally she consented. asad scene of separationfollows7).this is one of the most impressive scenes in nv.There are some verses about the attractiveness of children in sangam literature. andthere is also a chapter about sons inirukkural8.in addition, one genre of tamil literaturecalled pillait tamil (literally, tamil for a child) atose in the medieval period and so manyworks were composed in this genre. like this, the subject of the child is fundamental inTamil literature. hence one can safely state that many poets in tamil literature composedtheir poems with children in mind. Such a tendency is manifestin nv.
The  uTapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhistStudies4.didactic poemswhen nala began to gamble innL, his ministers did not persuade him against it vetyhard. butin nv, his minister tried to dissuade nala from gambling by teaching him somehort, didactic poems ). This scene reminds us of one verse about gambling itirukkural920. although there are didactic works also in sanskrit literature, the didactic work thatconsists of short and simple verses is a popular categoty in tamil literature. there aremany didactic works like tirukkural, nalatiyur and so on. itis clear that it was the favoritestyle among tamil people for expressing mottoes in a short poem. we can see this featurealso innv.
5.conclusion
as we have seen, in nv, nature and characters are described according to the traditionof tamil literature. and tamil culture is reflected in many places innv. all these thingsmake it clear that this work is not an easy version of nL. as mentioned earlier, it is saidthat the author of nv gained a great reputation by composing this work. we may say thathe was able to gain it because of adapting it fromnL accordingto tamil culture.Itis generally saidthat the tradition of tamil literature was almost lost with the influenceof sanskrit literature after the eleventh and twelfth centuries. in research on tamil litera-ture, the adaptations fro sanskrit literature are made with little thought, without fullyexamining them. however, we should not overlook that nv, which is an adaptation froma sanskrit work, was composed according to the tradition of tamil literature. it stronglyshows that the tradition of tamil literature from the sangam age still deeply remained atthat time. Therefore, we must reconsider the influence of Sanskrit literature on tamil litera-ture through a exanination of the extant works.(abbreviations> Nv nalavenpdnl. valopakhyamam1)see, for example, kuramtokni8.2)see, for example, kurumtokai67.3)nV1.82-84.4)nV187-89.5)nv10-1246)see, for example, ainkurinuru  andKuyuntokoi 1607)nv-75.8)tirukknral-709)nv44<key words) tamil, valavenpo, nalopakhyanam, The story of nala(Graduate student, tokvo university)
