The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies16)journalofindian ad buddhist studies vol.56,no.3, March8〓dvayabhruntiin the mahayanasutralamkora X.15MAtsuOka hiroko0.the simile of magic (maya-upama) is used to illustrate the trisvabhava theory in the〓ahoyanosutralamkara (abbr. mSa)xi.15-29.maitreya begins his exposition of thetheory with the following verse:MSax.1[L59,3-4yathg mayg tathabhutaparikaipo nirucyate / yathu moyakrtam tadvaddvayabhruntip nirucyate fとabhutaparikapg unreal imaginatiois declared to be like mayd magic", and dvoyabhranti theerroneous cognition of the grasped-grasper duality〓 like mayakrta what is created by magic'.*Here maitreya compares abhutaparikalpa and dvayubhranti respectively to moya and may,dkyta. commenting on the verse, vasubandhu explains that dvayabhranti, compared to aform of an elephant hastyadyokrti) which, created by magic, appears as an elephant, ap-pears as the grasped and the grasper (grahyagruhakatuen pratibhasita). little attention hasbeen given to this comparison of dvayabhrunti to the form of an elephant. what exactly ismeant by the term dvayabhranti?-This is the question i shall deal with in the present pa-per. the examination of this question will also make clear how what is called dvayabhrantiis to be characterized from the point of view of the trisvabhava theory. in considering thequestion, a verse of the trisvabhavanirdes (abbr. tsn),in which vasubandhu uses thesimile of magic to explain the trisvabhava theory, and the bhasya on mSaX.15cited byJnanasrimitra (ca.980-1030).a sakaravadin, in his sakarasiddhisastra (abbr. SSS) will bemade use of.
1.vasubandhu commments on mSAXi15as follows:〓Sabh ad msaX.1[L59,5-8yatha maya mantraparigrhitam bhrantinimittam kasthalo-stadikam tathabhutaparikapah paratamtrah svabhano veditavyah / yatho mayakrtam tsyommoyoyam hstycsvasuvarnodyakrtis tadbhovena pratibhasito tatha tusmninn abhutaparikappedvapabhruntip gruhyagrahakarvena pratibhasita parikalpitas vabhorakara veditavya
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies""The following is to be understood: as maya, such as a piece of wood ot a lump ofclay, under theinfluence of an incantation (mantra), becomes a cause of an erroneous cognition [that there existsan entity like an elephant] (bhrantinimitta), so abhutaparikapa, which is precisely a causallydependent nature (paratantrah svabhavah), [becomes a cause of an etroneous cognition that thereexist the grasped (grahya) and the grasper (grahaka)].In addition, the following is also to be understood as moyakyrta, that is, a formofan entity like anelephant (hastyadyakrti) which is brought about by [the cause of] the may syam mayayam),appears as [anentity] such [s an elephant] tadbhaiena pratibhcsita ),so an erroneous cognitionof the grasped-grasper duality dvayabhranti ), which is brought about by [the cause of] thetbhutaparikalpg sminn abhutaparikaipe) and which has the images of conceptually constructedlatures (parikapitasvubhopukora), appears as the grasped and the grasper (grohyagruhakatrenapratibhasita)."There are a few points to note here. first, vasubandhu takes the term maya as referring toamaterial for a magicalillusion oran obiect to which magic is applied. secondly, there isthe similarity between moya, or a material for a magical illusion, and abhutaparikalpa, inthat both become the cause of an erroneous cognition. in the case of magic there arises anerroneous cognition that an elephant really exists, which consists in a form of an elephantappearing as an elephant. in the case of abhutaparikalpa, on the other hand, there arisesan erroneous cognition that the grasped and the grasper really exist, which consists indvayabhrunti appearing as the two. thirdly, if a form of an elephant is moyakrta, or whatis brought about by the cause in the form of a material for a magical illusion, it has to beaccepted that dvayabhronti is 〓abhutaparikalpakrta', or what is brought about by the causein the form ofabhutaparikalpa.2.as shown, vasubandhu says in his mSabh that dvayabhranti appears as the graspedand the grasper. in Tsn9he says that asatkalpa, which is synonymous with abhutapari-kalpa, appears as the two.TSN128,8-9asatkalpas tatha khyati mulacittad dvayotmana /dvayum atyantuto nusti ta-trusty dkrtimatrakam"similarly, asatkalpa "unreal imagination', which is caused by the fundamental cognition mulacit-ta),appears as the grasped-grasper duality vaya). There does not exist the duality in any way.There exist only the images akrti) [of the grasped and the grasper] in the [asatkapa].Inmsabhon mSax15dvayabhranti is characterized as having the images of conceptu-ally constructed natures, that is, those of the grasped and the grasper, while here asatkalpa
The japanese Association of Indian and buddhist Studies〓ndvayabhrantiin the muhoyanasuitrulamkara xi.15(h. matsuoka)is described as that in which there really exist the images of the two. consider the following statements:(1)hastyakytir hastibhavena pratibhasita(〓The form of an elephant appears as an elephant'.)(2)dvayabhrantir grahyagrahakatvena pratibhasita vayabhranti appears as the grasped anthe grasper".)(3)asatkappo dvayatmana khyati ("satkalpa appears as the grasped-grasper duality'.)In the case of the magic show, it is said that the form of an elephant, which is brough1about by a material for a magical illusion and which is really existent, appears as an el-ephant. we cognize the elephant, which is not really existent, what is really existent thereis the form of the elephant. This is what is meant by(1).consequently, what is meant by(2)and(3)is. we cognize the grasped and the grasper, which are not really existent, whatis really existent is dvayabhranti or asatkalpa in which the images of the grasped and thegrasper are really existent. as the cognition of the elephant is an erroneous one, so alsois the cognition of the grasped and the grasper. thus it is clear that what is referred to bythe term dvayabhranti is a cognition by which the grasped and the grasper are erroneouslycognized as existent on the basis of the existence of the images of the two.3.jnanasrimitra quotes mSabhon mSAX.15,in support of his theoty that each cgniton has its own image and the 'obiect-image" that distinguishes it from other cognitions(sakuravadd). It is to be noted that he has a different reading of this text.sSS4848-9… tathatsminn abhutaparikalpe dvayabhrantir grahyagrahakatvena pratibha-sita parikaipitasvabhavakurata veditavyewhat is to be understood is this: .. similarly, the erroneous cognition of the grasped-grasper du-ality, which is brought about by the cause of the abhutaparikalpa, appears as the grasped and thegrasper, that is, [the abhutaparikatpa has] the property of possessing the images of [the entities]which have the essential nature of being conceptually constructed.'The reading parikalpitasvabhovakarata is given instead of the reading parikappitasvabha-vakara. according to jnanasrimitra,4what is referred to by the term parikalpitsvabha-vakarata is the property tasya bhavas tatta) which is possessed by abhutaparikalpa, whatis meant by the term parikalpitasvabhava is the grasped and the grasper, since they havethe essential nature of being conceptually constructed, and, what is signified by the termparikalpitas vabhavakura is the images of the grasped and the grasper. Thus, what jnanas-rimitra intends to say by adopting the reading parikalpitasvabhovakarato is that abhuta-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies〓dvapabhramtiin the mahoyanasutralamkara x.1(H. matsuoka)(1parikapa has the images ofthe grasped and the grasper.Jnanasrimitra explains the important phrase dvayabhrantir grahyagrahakatvena pratib-〓
hosit as follows.SSs484,17-18: grahyagrahakatvena pratibhasitadhyavasita / yatha mayadisu haspyodyava-sayas tatha 'bhutaparikalpe dvayavasoya ity evarthch"By saying dvayabhrantir grahyagrahakatvena pratibhasita, vasubandhu intends to imply thatdvayabhranti is determined as the grasped and the grasper adhyavasita). the following is pre-cisely what is meant: as the form of an entity like an elephant is determined as an entity like anelephantin magic and others (hcstyadyavasaya ), so the dvayabhranti is determined as the grasped-grasper duality (dvayavasaya) in the abhutaparikalpa."It is important to note that jnanasrimitra paraphrases pratibhasita s appears' with adhyavasita is determined'. In his trinsika vasubandhu states that the conceptual construc-tion of the self and factors (atmadharmopacara) occuts on the basis of the transformationof consciousness (vijnamaparinama). we may say that jnanasrimitra explains this point byintroducing the theoty of adhyavasaya 'determination', according to which the appearanceof an image ofa certain entity is sharply distinguished from the determination of the imageas the entity. it goes without saying that jnanasrimitra, as a sakaravadin, cannot deny thereality of an image appearing to a cognitionIt is stated that as the form of an elephant is determined as an entity like an elephantinthe magic show, so the dvayabhranti is determined as the grasped-grasper duality (dvayauasaya) in the abhutaparikapa. clearly, jnanasrimitra takes the term dvayabhrunti as refer-【ing to the images of the grasped and the grasper dyayasya bhrantir atraasyimkryan]),since, in the theory of adhyavasaya, what is determined is an image appearing to a cogni-tion and something unreal is posited on the basis ofthe existence of the image.4.in the case ofa magic show, maya, which is a material for a magicalillusion, such as apiece of wood, brings about a form ofan elephant, which is really existent and which givesrise to an erroneous cognition that an elephant exists there. in the case of abhutaparikapa,it brings about dvayabhranti, in which the images of the grasped and the grasper are reallyexistent and which gives rise to a eironeous cognition that the two really exist.There is no doubt that by saying dvayabhrantip grahyagrahakatuena pratibhosita vasu-bandhu intends to explain how such an erroneous cognition arises. on the assumption thatdayabhranti consists in a cognition by which the grasped and the grasper are erroneously
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieScognized as really existent and which has the real images of the two, saying that dvayabhranti appears as the grasped and the grasper amounts to saying that the two are simplywhat are erroneously cognized as existent on the basis of the existence of those imagesThus the term dvayabhranti may mean a cognition by which the grasped and the grasperare erroneously cognizedas existent on the basis of the existence of the images of the twoThis erroneous cognition is just a causally dependent nature (paratantrasvabhona) since itcan be saidto be what is brought about by abhutaparikalpa.Ftom the point of view of the theoty of adhy'avcsaya, such images are what are deter-mined. Thus, for jnanasrimitra, the term dvayabhronti is easily understood to signify theimages ofthe grasped and the grasper.1)note that the tetm abhutaparikapa literally means "that byfin which somnething unreal -huta) is conceptually constructed', referring to a cognition (vinana). See MvT13,18-19,SSs48-2
2)see lambert Schmithausen, hlayaviinana: n the origin ad the eaydevelopmentofacentral conceptof yogacura philosophy, partii(tokyo:1987),355,n.503)thakur om. tathu.4)see sSS4,11-17<abbreviationsy MSA ahoyanasutralamkara: See mSabh. mSabh ahayanasutralamkarabhasg s. levi, ed. patis,1907.mVThadhyantavibhogatiku: s. yamaguchi, ed. tokyo,193,Reprint,1966.SSS sakarasiddhisastra in jjnanasrimitramibandhovalis: a. Thakur, ed. patna, 1987.TSN trisvabhavanirdesa: s. Yamaguchi, ed. s. yamaguchis writings buddhist stdies, tokyo,1978.
<key words)ahoyanasutralamkara, moyopama, moyya, dvoyabhranfi, jnlanastimnitraadhyurvasapg
(Graduate student, hiroshima university)
