The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudieS〓 the Function of the Root-aorist ParticipledoyaMa Eiiiro1.Tense stems and aspectsThe indo-european aspect system with the aorist-present opposition is evidenced inGreek and vedic1, the aorist stem represents the " perfective" aspect, which views an actas a single point in time, or simply states only whether an act takes place or not, whereasthe present stem represents the "imperfective"" aspect which views an actin progressforwhich we shall use below schwyzr/debrunneR's terms "confective" and "infective" respectively〓).although the aspect belongs to a dimension different from the "aktionsart," which refersto the temporal width of the lexical meaning a verb root originally possesses, these two cat-egories correlate to a certain degree. atoot with apunctualdurative aktionsart is naturallyinclined to the confectivefinfective aspect, forming the aorist/present stem from the bareroot form (root-aorist/-present), while it can form the presentfaorist stem only with somemodification of the root (suffix, reduplication etc).4)HofrMann der injunktiv im veda(1967)esp.105,271ff., examining the prohibitivesentence (injunctive), has made clear that the aorist and present iniunctive, corre.ponding to each aspect, represent the preventive"" sense (for acts to occur) and inhibitive"ne (for acts in progress) respectively〓.he, ibid.271ff., also points out the likely differ-ence of aspectin non-prohibitive injunctive and indicative, but remains skeptical about thepresence of such a difference in other moods.,2.The aorist participle and the aspectsThe aorist participle is formed by adding -active),--mcn-middle) tothe stem. it is well attested in the Rig-veda, but only sporadically in other mantra texts,'which shows a distribution parallel to that of the modal forms of the aorist stem. most ofthe attestation belong to the root-aorist.9) only few participles are made from the a-aoristand, probably secondarily, from two s-aorists, dhdksat- dah) and saksat-/sdksant- sa).10)
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesless attention has been payed to the semantical or functional aspects of the vedic aoristparticiple which seems to have been interpreted only in certain cases after the model ofjreek.11it is noteworthy that delbrutck altindische syntax (1888)381examined threeaorist participles bhiyand-, drsand-, idhand-, concluding their ingressive meaning 〓inFurcht geraten" etc. however, his discussion is fragmentary and his argument is very mod-est. we shall below examine a wider range of examples of the root-aorist participle fromthe viewpoints of its semantical relationship with the presentperfect participle or with themain verb, allowing the observation ofclearer aspectual difference.3.functions of the root-aorist participle〓.1preceding actLike in greek, the root-aorist participle often expresses an act which precedes the mairact, contrasting sharply with the present participle used to express an act occurring simul-taneously with the main one. in some cases one cannot tell whether the preceding act hasfinished completely or has only started (ingressive), cf. hunand- below. in the latter casehowever, it is the starting point thatis focused on and not the actin progress.〓22,dcha gmanto sa prchate vam kdartha n dgrjagmathuh parakid."Then, when [you] two arrived, usanas asks you two (pres. ind.) : For what purposehave you come (perf. ind.) to our house from far away.?'-cf. X6,6suta imusvamdroio 'y arsanti babhronch indram gchanta indoch The pressed [somas]flow forward (pres. ind.) one after another to their own space, the brown drops, going(pres. prtc.) to indra.〓130,ab piba somam indra suvanam dcribhih kosena sikiom oatom nd wamsagah indradrink (pres. iptv.) Soma which was (when it is) pressed with stones and poured by thepail, like abig cow (drinks)[from] a well1c. 〓x1,13ab prd sumvandsydsnchasomdrto nd vrta tcd vdcah 〓the mortal one 12)does not prefer (aor. inj.) the voice (thesound of pressing) ofthe young bud (of soma) while itis pressed (pres. prtc.).'Further exapmles: iv,4cd pori agmih pasupd nd hota tivistyeti pradiva mranoh Agni,selected from old times as the hotar, goes around (pres. ind.) like a cowherd with threeworks.', x99,6cd asyo trito ojasa vrdhano vipa varaham oyoagraya htrita, nowstrengthened by his (own) power, kills (pres. inj.) the wild boar by the excited wordsequipped with the metallic tip.", ii18,5ab d vimsatyd trimisdta yyarva dcatvorimstoa
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieshoribhir ynianth〓come along hither (pres. iptv.) when you tied your [chariot] with twen-ty, thirty, fourty tawny [horses].', x112,3cd asmabhir indra sakhibhir huvanah sdhricino mudayasva nisdtta〓when you are called, o indra, by us (your) allies, inebriateyourself (pres. iptv.) sharing the same goal (with us) after sitting down!",i32,8ab nadcmnd bhinncm amuyd soyanom mano rnhona ati yty ah the waters get on and over(pres. ind.) [vrtra] who lies cruelly like a reed cut away (ie. get over one after another).7;vi6,5ab ddha jihvd popatiti pra vrsno gosuynidho nd sih srjund "then the tongue(flame) of the bull (Agni) flies out again and again (intens. ind.) like the arrow shot by themne fighting for cows." in the last two examples, the repetitiveness ofthe acts is understoodfrom the contexts.This function should not be confused with that of the perfect participle, which indicatesthat the achieved state or the influencefresult ofan act still continues (referring to the presentstate), ii11,20ab asya suvandsya mandlinas tritasya y arbudm vaprdhano astah fterhe had grown strong (ie. in the state of being strong) (by some of) the intoxicating [ Soma]when it was pressed (aor. prtc.) by trita, he struck down (aor. ind.) arbuda,' as opposed tothe aorist participle which only refers to the performance itself, X55,8cd piti somasyaji d wrdhanoh suro nr yudhddhamad dsyu grown strong after drinking of soma,the valorous one (indra) blew off (ipf.) the enemies from the heaven in the battle.Since the aorist participle plainly states that something happens before something else,tunderlines now and again that an act presupposes another one, as can be seenin some otthe above examples: "when….〓.2consequence of an actThe following root-aorist participles seem to be used proleptically, expressing the con-sequence or the result of the main act. in other words, they anticipate the act which comescffer the main act as opposed to3.1.here we can say that the objectified act as a point inlime is placed ahead in the future, as is the case in the preventive sentence of risinjunctive.
I122,4ab utd tya . yassa..vycnta piousijio huvddhyai 〓 and in order to call thoserenowned two (asvins) so that they seek (pres. prtc.)1)and] drink (our soma),(〓,)the son of usii(, amhere).
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS〓57,3cd rodsi visvapisch pisanih smancm iy njate subhe km〓Maruts] withyety ornament put on the same makeup (pres. ind.) to be gorgeous so that they adornheaven and earth.'3.3aqentof an actIn the following examples the root-aorist participle is apparently used as an independentsubstantive that signifies an agent doing something regularly or by profession, or a generalcharacteristic of the subiect.〓2,1ha ha yd vayam agne tnyoyd padbhir hdstebhis cakymd tamibhi rdtham ndkranto apasa bhurior rtam yemuh suhy asusandh Then, which (rta) we, in searchfor you,oagni, have created (perf. ind.) with [our] feet, hands, bodies, like those whomake a chariot (or: chariot makers) with the operation of [their] both arms, (that) rtawe have been holding, snorting for (it), [we] with goodconsideration.'V86,5ab td wrdhdntoy au din mdrtaya deud adbha The two (indra and agni) arethose who grow up day after day for the mortal, thetwo gods without deceit.?170,3 gdrbhoy apim garbho vcnuncm gorbhas ca sthatim gorbhas carothamgni, ]Nho is the embryo of the waters, the embryo of the trees, the embtyo of the standingones, the embryo of the moving ones4)Such a meaning is most likely derived from the confective aspect of the aorist stem:the one who acts so and so in the first place, in generel. according to tichy die nominaagentis auf -r-im vedischen995)113f..144. the hysterotonic nomen agentis in -tr/t-, which represents the actual, occasional or potential agent, is interchangeable with thepresent participle to some extent, e. g. grndnt-～jaritor-"singing, one who sings [a wel-come song], singer.15) we might then say that in our context the generalizing characterof the root-aorist participles above coresponds to the acrotonic nomen agentis(' -taritr-)which expresses the habitual, generalized agent.〓.-occurring actsome examples are only interpretable as expressing an act simultaneous with that of themain verb, just like the present participle.〓V3,11a rtenosorimn bhidintah with rta they (the angiras') broke and scat-tered (aor. inj.) the rock (ie. broke the rock asunder).
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies〓92,12ab pasu nd citrd subhaga prathand . urviyd vsvait The fortunate, multi-colored [uas] has shined forth (aor. ind.) widely, extending herselflike the cattle.'x5,8ab drsano rukmd urviydaud drmarsam dyuh sriye rucundh being identi-led as a plate ornament (on the breast), he (agni) has flashed (aor. ind.) widely fothe beauty, while he brought the vitality hard to forget with brightning.'a notable characteristic of the examnples of this kind is that each main verb shows ahighly punctual aktionsart and correspondingly the aorist stem.1 considering this fact,we could not deny that each participle is also formed from the aorist stem correlating withthe main verb, though it is always possible that they are used in no different way from thepresent participle without any aspectual difference.4.conclusion
The root-aorist participle can represent an act that occurs (or whose commencement oc-curs) before the main act (3.1),the consequence of the main act(3.2),the agent or thegeneral character of a subject(3.3),and an act which co-occurs with an act of the punctua.aktions-art expressed by a aorist stem4).theoretically, one wohle act viewed as anextentless pointin time could be obiectified as a past, future or generalized act. These threepossibilities seem to correspond to the three functions discussed in3.3.as a whole the confective aspect of the aorist stem can be regarded as still functioningin the root-aorist participle. There are indeed many cases left where we cannot tell the dif-ference in meaning between the aorist and the present participle. since, however, a goodmany examples are best explained by the aspecutal characteristics inherited from the proto-IE language, we may safely say that these traits were still partly alive in the participles aswell as in the iniunctive-indicative forms, or at least that their traces were still partiallyextant in certain lexica or more or less fixed expressions in the rig-veda. we believe thatin order to clarify the full significance of the aspectin the vedic verbal system the disputedmodal forms too should be investigated.1)see hoffmanN aufsatze zur indoiranistik(1975,1976)36425f., 530.2)The twopects ate referred toby e. Hrman GN15(1943)602as "gesamtschau" ad "verlaufsschau"re-pectively.3)schwyzR/dabrunnR Griechische grammatik(1950)〓252.4)seeHofpmanN aufs.529ff.-n the general discussion and the research histoty of the aspect see for〓ample schwY-7r/runNER ibid.248ff.5)e.g. md (pdri) sthah (aor. inj.) 〓don't
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesstand in the way' md tisthah (pres. inj.) 'do't stay any mnore.'6)hofpmann injunktiv276n.2, aufs.34.cf. t. S. Radev a morphological study of some movement verbs in theRgveda (dissertation, tohoku university 〓3)53ff., where he supposes the reflexion of theaspectual difference in the modal forms of the root-aorist stemof gum.7)cf. wacker.nagl/derunNeR altindische grammatik ii(1954)160,271f., whitney sanskrit grammmar, 2nded.(1889)840f., macdonell vedic grammar(1910)370.8)see hofemannaufs.ii6.9)the root-aorist participle is made from the zero-grade stemn, but keeps the longvowel in the roots ending in pont-, sthimt-), see hoFFMann aufs.24110)see nartendie sigmatischen aoriste im veda(1964)134,266f.11)The discussion by dlbrckvergleichende syntax der indogermanischen sprachen(897)〓3,though under the titleearisch und greichisch," deals only with examples fom greek.n the functions of the greekaotist participle see e.g. kuhner ausfuhrliche grammatik der griechischen sprache ii-(1898)97-200.12)the miserly one is meant, see gldner rig-veda ad loc.13)notethat vayi cannot form an aorist stem.14)cf. the similar expression sthatuis curdithar"standing and moving one,' see ticy die nomina agentis auf --i vedischen995)71.15)the similarity between the participle in general and the nomen agentis has been pointed ontinearlier studies, cf. tichy ibid.21ff.16)In fact root-aorist.I92,12asvait and xdyant,though apparently s-aorists, are most likelyrenovated forms to the original root-aorists (c asvitan,prtc. dyutand-/dyutana-), see narten, aoriste 148261,(key words) rgveda, vedic, aspect, aktionsart, aorist, participle, syntax(Associate Professor, osaka university)
