The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudieSdrinking goddess, Non-drinking brahminIba katsuyuki0.IntroductionIt is commonly argued that the use of "impurities" such as liquor and meat is one ofthe distinctive characteristics of hindu tantrism. in contrast to asceticforthodox hindu-ism which avoids such "impurities", tantrism often attempts to accomplish religious goalsthrough the employment of them. goudriaan described this as follows."The practice of realizing the double-sided nature of existence by an intentional, regulated contact〓often performed only mentally-with socially disapproved persons or entities such as meat,wine, low-caste women or bodily excretions."However, such an interpretation accounts only partially for the employment of liquor inTantrism, because it seems unlikely that tantrics-who were mainly puritanical brahmin-started to use intoxicating liquor only for violating the taboo itself. Thus the aimof thispaper will be to observe the practical necessity of the employment of liquorin tantrism.1.backqround: liquorinorthodox hinduism1.1.ndrinkingThe avoidance of surais already shown in the vedic scriptures. subsequently, thedharmasastras 4 include drinking liquor as one of the great sins from which the brahminmust keep away)n the expiation for the sin of drinking, manusmrti [S]mentions"if the brahmin drinks liquor through folly, he should [then] drink liquor coloured as a fire-boiling hot). when his bodyis consumed byit, then he will be released from the fault. (mS11.91)" itis widely known that abstaining from drinking is one of the important norms fororthodox hindus, especially brahmin.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieson the other hand, for the appeasement of ancestors, spirits, or demons, the offering ofliquor is mentioned in a number of post vedic scriptures, such as the grhyasutras. for ex-mple, vinayaka, who possesses and impairs humans, accepts liquor as an offering: "eshould offer] a variegated, fragrant flower and three types of sura as well (yainaualkyasmrti[YS]1.288)〓.the asvalayanagrhyasutra ii5-5etc. mentions the offering of sura toone's female ancestors 8). oreover, in the 47th chapter of the brhatsamhita ,orthe royal ablution on the day of pusya, we can observe demons (such as pisoca, daitya, anddanava) who are worshiped with liquor b7.27-31).To sum up, we can say that in thecontext of orthodox hinduism, offerings of liquor are "used for the worship of an unusualdivinity, or a demonic being we should also pay attention to the fact that offerings ofliquor are found in contexts quite unrelated to the avoidance of drinking. however, it alsoseems clear that there is a consistency between the brahmin's taboo on drinking liquor andthe offering of liquor to a demonic, awful being: both rules could be intenpreted as intend-ing to preserve purity, and keep away impurity.2.liquorinhindu Tantrism2.1.drinking
let us now tumn to our main topic, the treatment of liquor in tantrism. The kularnava-tra [a-13ct., one of the most important sakta-kaula scriptures, divides indi-viduals between layman pcsu) and initiated (kaulika). it states that drinking is prohibitedonly for the former, but the kaulikas will attain good results by consuming liquor. The kaexplains:
"liquor and meat are not to be smelled, not to be seen, and not to be drunk by pasus. however[they bestow] great result on kaulikas. For the brahmin and etc., [there are] eleven liquors [which]are not fit for sacrifice. however the twelfth great suru is the best of all [liquors ]. liquor is the filthof food, and filth is mentioned as sin. thus the btahmin, kshatriya, and vaisya should not drinklaquor12)ka2.24-6*Because of the special permission to break taboos granted to the kaulikas, it is commnonlyconsidered that tantrism is characterized by "an intentional, regulated contact"" with im-uurity. we can clearly observe double standards on drinking for laymen and initiated inthe lalitopokhyaathis text shows strict restrictions on drinking for enjoyment.Even if one is a kaula, he or she must drink only for the admiration and sake of the god-
The  uTapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhistStudiesif he drinks liquor without worshiping the supreme sakti, [then] he, the worst, will dwell in theraurava hellfor as many years as the number of drops [he drank]. if he drinks liquor with adesire for enioyment, he is the worst of man. There is no expiation for him, except for throwingimself on a rock or on fire. The brahmin should not drink out of folly, addiction or desire 1)(〓.47.76-78ab).Itmust be noted that these passages in the tantras have a great resemblance to the ones inthe dharmasastras16)2.2.offering the liquorin esoteric rituals of hindu tantrism, the divinity is frequently worshipped through of-ferings of liquor. it is stressed in the kulacudamaninigama kc that even brahmins shalloffer liquor and meat to the goddess in the ceremony of kula-puia c577-78). it is pos-sible that the following statements in the ka derive from the above-mentioned prohibitionrules regarding liquor. kaenumerates 12several kinds of liquor, and praises the last one,the suru:
The twelfth liquor, the best of all, is the sura. oh, belovedl sura is known in three kinds, paisti,gaudi, and mudhyipisti is a bestower of all accomplishments. gaudi is a bestower of enjoy-ment. muchvi is a bestower of liberation. sura should be known as dear to divinity. (ka5.30cd-32ab)
It is also statedin ka that sura pleases, and is loved by all deities (56,37),a kaulika, of-fering the liquor to siva and meat to sakti, makes them glad (5.71).and even more impor-tantly, the kaclaims that liquor could be a means for the final liberation (mukti), of accom-plishtnent (siddhi)"by only looking at the sura, he is released from all sins. by only smelling it, he will obtain thegood results of sacrifice times a hundred. by only touching the liquor, he will obtain the good re-sults of ten million holy places. oh, goddess! by drinking it, he will directly obtain four kinds ofliberations a538-39)Itis clear from what we have seen that the drinking and offering of liquor are regarded as aseries of practices for attaining liberation.Interestingly enough, some of the tantric texts try to exclude liquor from ritual proce-dure. the lU shows another posture on the offering of liquor. eif there are other saktis, at
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesthe time of their worship, honey liquor (madhu) is commanded. however, a brahmin whchas mastered the veddnga should worship [the saktis] without it (l3.73)." it seems that,in this text, the brahmin's drinking taboo has priority over the goddess' taste for liquor.The same sont of hesitation by the brahmin in the employment of liquor in ritual can beseen in the katikapurana [,which is widely known for its tendency toward Tantricreligion: "the asava liquor 19) and such should never be employed in any time, not eve1once. The brahmin adept should offer the liquor by the hand ofothers (742"3.conclusion
In orthodox hinduism, the drinking and offering of liquor take place in different con-texts. on the other hand, both ways of employing liquor exist in tantrism as two faces ofthe same coin. within the tantric context, Sadhaka offers liquor to the supreme divinity,subsequently drinking the remnant. dividing the individuals into two groups, layman aninitiated, the ka allows the drinking and offering ofliquor only for the later.orthodox brahmins keep their purity by the avoidance of liquor, but they appease de-mons and ancestors (beings regarded as marginal or impure") by offering it. Tantric sadhakas(who are mainly brahmins), inturn, perform such offering to their main god/goddess (siva andsakti). even though we have no definite information on this change of obiects of offering, itseens plausible that Tantric deities which have powetful, awful characteristics, and bestowworldly benefits on sadhakas are rather similar to the former "impure" beings.when the offering of liquor is adopted in a central position within the tantric ritual, ap-parent contradictions of the taboo on drinking arise. it seems incongruous that the tantricSadhaka, who maintain their conventional morality as brahmins, worship the main god-dess by offering the same liquor he avoids. This apparent contradiction can be solved inthe following way. if the brahmin worships a divinity who enjoys drinking, then he mustenioy it as well. bearing this idea in mind, the ka statements which value liquor highly,can be understoodas an evasion of this inconsistency. however, this kindof permission fordrinking is in disagreement with the ordinary brahmanical norms, thus the employment ofliquor is limited only to the experienced devotee, and in the context of religious practices.〓the other hand, comparatively moderate texts such as the lu and kp suggest brahminsworship the goddess without employing actual liquor, or to offer liquor through the handsof an assistant. we may now say that a positive evaluation of liquor in tantrism is not so
The  uapanese sSociationofIndian and buddhistStudiesDrinking goddess, non-drinking brahmink.ida)much an intentional violation of the taboo as itis anullification ofit.1)goudriaan, t., hoens, d. j., gupta, S., hindu tantrism, e. j. brill,1979,pp.8-9.2)itis thought that during the vedic age, sura was a kind of beer, but afterward the word cameo mean liquor in general. See einoo s., "kodai indono gireiniokeru sakeno shiyou"ijaarea studfies research reporis vol.4,3,pp.150-155.3)kane, p. v., historyodharmasastra, vol. ii,1993,p.9644)manusmrti with the sanskrit commenty amvarthamuktovati of kuiluka bhatta, ed. by a.Sarasvati, delhi,1981rep.), yoinavallyasmrti of yogisvcra yajnaralkyya, ed. by narayan ramacharya, nag publishes 198(rep.).5)killing a brahmin, drinking liquor, stealing, aproaching the guruis wife, and associating withthese people [who have performed such acts], they call it great sins mS11.5).cf. ys3.2276)cf. YS3253f,7)einoo, op. cit., p.154.8)kaneii965, einoo, op. cit., pp.13-.9)brhatsamnhitc with bhattotpal commentaty, ed. by dvivedin, s., vol1,banarasi,1968(1895).
10)einoo, op. cit., p.157.11)kularnavatantra, ed. by taranathavidyaratna, delhi,1965.12)asimilar explanation can be seen in the mS11.94. Furthermore. sura was already understoodas the filth of foodin kothakasamhita as well.13)a1th century text, the lalitopukhyana is the last part of the brahmandapurona, beingregarded as a scripture by the sakta-srividya sect. brahmandapurana of kr dvaipoyanuVyosa, ed.by shastri, j.l. delhi.1983(rep.).14)itis widely knownas one of the21hells stated in S8-90.15)cf. ms11.9016)cf. kulacusmani 17.17)The three kinds of sura are sometime mentioned in the dharmasastras as well. mS11.95,cf.Kane iiip.9,einoo, op. cit., p.155.18)the kalikapurana, ed. and tr. by shastri, b.n., 3 vols., nag publishers,1991.19)cf. aalto p., "madyamapeyam"i commemoration volume ihononrofjj. nobel, 1963, pp.21-22.
〓
(jspSResearch fellow)
