The japanese association of Indian and buddhist StudiesThe vedic intensive forms foundinpanini-sutra.the problem of some nipatama-forms 1ozono jun'ichi0.under the expressions such as chandcsi 〓in vedic', mamtre in formula', and brahmanei〓n bramana literature', panini points out vedic forms or usages. considening the relationshipbetweenpanini and the veda, two questions arise. The firstis: what vedic texts does the termchandas cover the term chandas includes undoubtedly the rigveda, black Yaiuvedas (in-cluding prose portion), while it is difficult to decide whether chandas includes brahmana texts.The second is. what is the role of nipatana-"putting down [as a fonm as it is], lexicaliza-tion'ccording to traditional grammarians, the nipatana is the establishment of a wordwhich cannot be explained by any rules. in most cases we can understand nipotana-formsas exceptional words. Some of them can, however, be explained by normal rules. Thereforethe question arises, for what pumpose panini enummerates vedic forms. in what manner tra-ditional grammarians treat them, also needs to be examined. vedic intensive forms dodharti,dardharti, dardharsi, bobhutu, tetikte, enumerated inan. vi,5,are worth while verify-ing from the historical and systematic standpointof panini's grammar.1.Ivianini prescribes the formation of reduplicated stems for the present, aorist,perfect, desiderative, and intensive.18vedic reduplicated verbal forms are enumerated in〓,65.all of which panini seems to have regarded as intensive fomms yaivor yan-/uk);a exception may be only dodharti. traditional grammarians interpret some of them as ir-regular reduplicated presents (udadharti dardharti dardharsi bobhutu tetikte 'rsy dpamiphanat samsanisyadat karikrat kan-ikradad bharibhrad davidhyato davidyutat taritratah sarisrpatam varivrian marmriyaganigantitic [chandasi 64vedic, tadharti, dardharti, dardharsi, bobhutu, tetikte. [are also found] .2.1. didharti redupl.pres. ind. srd sg. act.Injbii37we can find the form:atha yat prano bhutva parani cavaruni cahani dadharti teno eva praia dudharayati〓and when, after he becomes the breath, he holds the preceding and following days, and
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesby that, he causes [them] to hold the descendants".dudharti is aredupl. pres., made fiom the strong stem of perfect dodhara.itis attested onlyin jb〓37however. this fact is still not sufficient to conclude that chandlcs- includes brah-mana-texts. The secondary causative dddharayati, directly made from ducharti, is also attestedonly here, and we may expect that panini would have cited also this formin some appropreateplace, if he had known this occurrence. assuming that panini did not take dadharti fromjbi37,it follows that this was taken from some lost vedic literature. forms from the stem dodhar-/dodhr-, which are not enumarated inv45, are found. in addition, in the blackYv adhratisrd pl.) and avp ddhart)pf. iptv.). dadhratiis built from ddharti after aproportion such assg. bibharti (bibhdrri)  pl. bibhrati. dudhartu is to be regarded as anormal perfect imperative,if not a redupl.pres., which is similarly made from docharti. it is difficult to decide, whetherpanini didnot know these forms, or founditunecessaty to enumerate.Pataniali regards dudharti as an redupl. pres.( of dharayati (dhn dhpi,inwhich the vowel of reduplicated syllable is lengthened and the causative-suffix) is delet-ed. the analternate interpretation is the redupl. pres. of dhriyate (dhrndhv119),in whichthe vowel of reduplicated syllable is lengthened. These phenomena cannot be explained byordinary rules, but, according to him, are inferred from vedic rules or other formations. ac-cording to him, this is not a nipotana-form for the same reasons. kasika-vrtti suggests in ad-dition to the interpretation as a redupl. pres., also the interpretation as an intensive (yaiv-iuk)2.2.*dardhartiintens. pres. ind. srd sg., durdharsi 2nd sg.dardharsi is attestedinrvv84kSX11.drdha cid y wanasptinsmaya dardharsiy diasa "you, firm yourself, who hold thetrees on the earth with [your] strength.".dardharti is not attestedin any vedic texts. dardharsi is foundinvv84. and its paral-lel. adardhar (intens. impf.) from the stem dardhar- also appears in rvi8,4, which isnot listed here. itis noteworthy that panini lists both srd and zndsg. This fact points to thepossibility that he might have recorded vedic forms faithfully so far as he knew. from thestandpoint of the rules, we can arrive at the regular intensive form dardharti through thenormal derivation, and the same is true of dardharsi ). it is quite possible that Panini enu-merated them because they are exclusively found in the veda.according to patanjali, durdharti and dardharsi are redupl. pres. (slu, in which the aug-ment r ruk) is introduced after the reduplicated syllable, though it should be introduced
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhistStudiesonly in the case of intensive stems. as this is inferred from other formations, it is not to beregardedas a nipdtana.2..〓bobhutu intens. pres. iptv. 3rd sg. act.bobhutu is not attested in any vedic texts. Thus, we cannot but agree with the coniecturethat it is taken from a lost vedic literature. The stem of intens. pres. takes usually a full-grade root form in iptv. srd sg. act'. (e.g. dardurtu, marmartu,etc. see schaeFER das intensivmmp.35).panini seems to be conscious that such a full-grade formas bobhaviti is usually used.ltis thus supposed that he thought bobhutu was out of use in common speech.various intensive forms of vbhu, which are not listed here, appearin vedic: pres. indbobhaviti rvii53,8,pres. part. bobhuvati avsv7,8,zero-grade subj. ni-bobhuvat, vthe black Ysm, full-gr. subi. bobhavat sbMi2,3,16(～bobhunvat sbk23,13).since bob-haviti rv and bobhuvati avs are ordinaty forms, also in common speech, panini mighthave thought unnecessary to record them. the subiunctive of intensives usually has a full-grade in the root-syllable, but we cannot judge which oftwo forms-ull-gr. bobhauat andrero-gr. bobhu-s expected as the regular form by panini-sutra. opinions are dividedmmong traditional grammarians on this point 8).panini prescribes the use of subjunctivemood )only in vedic (〓i4,7 and8).The common rules do not take the usage of thesubiunctive into consideration.The problem is that bobhutu is cited as a nipotana-form although the guna is in any caseexcluded by v3,889). traditional grammarians 1 regard bobhaviti with guna in the rootsyllable as the regular fomm, and bobhutu, which is in accordance with the rule in question,as a niputana-form. according to patanjali, bobhutu is listed for the pupose that the appli-cation of vi3,88is. in the intensive, restricted only to the fom in question ie. niyama).According to kasika and siddh. kaum. 3596,the niputana-form bobhutu has the puposethatit indirectly indicates (ie. jnapanafinapaka) that *bobhotior bobhaviti is a regular form.〓..tetikieintens. pres. ind. srd sg. midtetikte is attestedinviv23.7teikte tigma tuiase dnika he (Indra) sharpens his [weapon's] edge again and again for assault'.tetikte is found onlyinviv23,7. it is likely that the form is taken from this passage. inPanini's grammar, the intensive with-y- yan), which always takes the middle conjuga-tion, is treated as the normal type. on the other hand, panini does not prescribe when theform without -y- anv-iuk) is accomplished byii,74. That is, the form with-y-can
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiestheoretically be made from evety verbal root. in vedic, middle athematic intensives suchas tetikte. memikte. deciste are not rare. it is after the rv (especially since brahmana literature )that the middle forms with-y- grow more productive11).to sum up, the intensive fonmwhich can be formed from panini's sutras is not necessarily uniform. for example, * tetijy-ate can also be realized12).The traditional account on the intensive without -yd- seems to be unsatisfactory. accord-ing to the traditional view, tetikte is a nipatana-formin respect of the middle conjugation,though it is explained by i3,1213.pataniali concludes that the middle intensive without-yd- is restricted to tetikte. That is, the intensive without -y- yan-tuk) usually takes theactive conjugation (e.g. bebhiditi, cecchiditi).3.conclusion
ddharti is found only jbi37,whereas most forms taught in vedic rules are traced inthe rigveda or black Yaiurvedas. it is, however, unlikely that panini took dadharti fromJBI372..).
Traditional grammarians insist that all the forms listed inanvi5be niputana, ornot explained by ordinary rules. according to this statement, it follows that the fegularintensive is not listed in,5.that is why, traditional grammarians, from the in-terpretative necessity, regard dudharti, dardharti, dardharsi as the irrgular redupl. pres.Furthermore, traditional grammarians often infer the role of nipatana from forms used incommon speech. bobhutu and tetikte are interpreted as the mipatana-formn that has the spe-cial function such as niyama or inapanait is obvious that Panini regarded dardharti, dardharsi, bobhutu, tetikte as intensives. itis noteworthy that dardharti and durdharsi are enummerated in the nipotana-rule, thoughthey can be explained by ordinary rules. itis unusual that the forms which can be explainedby ordinary rules are listed even if they often occur in the veda. according to renou,niputana is originally the instruction on vedic lexicon)the findings of our observatiorsupport his statement. That is, panini would have recorded such vedic forms as had beenalready fossilized in his date, even if they could be explained by ordinary rules. in otherwords, niputana-forms are listed not only from the prescriptive standpoint but also fronrthat of common usage.1)i would like to thank dr. ogawa for giving me helpful suggestions on the statement of tradi-
The uapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhistStudiestional grammar.2)see, in paticular, liepanini, p.27f,thieME panini and the veda, p7.For the dis-cussion after thiemE, see kobyahpanini's phonological rules and vedic: astadhyayi8.2.'Jounal of indological studies 18,p.18f.3)iwasaki ' Formulating devices in the Paninian grammar systemwith reference to nipa-tana, samina, and bahulam,,bulletin of sapporo otani junior college, vol.34,p.13f. porfurther details of nipatana, see joshi-roodbeen vyakarana-mahabhasya (ta),1976,p.1234)dadhara complements the conjugation of dharayati. See, ai.synt.297f., jamSon-aya-forma-tions, p.94f.5)avp-kashm.has dchartu6)the derivation of dorchartiis as follows: dhn(hpi948)-yni1,-hr-yv1,9〓ha-h-yh-y v-r-ukiruk-dhrv〓-h2,12dhr-fip-dhr--tii1-dhr-uk-i ii4,72(Gana-sutraoh7)〓-dhar-ti v3.84,7)the aorist and the perfet of vbhu always shows a zero-grade (e.g. aor. ind. abhit, pf. indbabhuva, pf. iptv. babhutu). For the stem of aor. subi. bhuva-, see goto ipras.229f., doyaA〓amorphological study of the first person subjunctive in the rigveda' machikaneyama ronso,vol.38,p,2f. The aor. and pf. of u' bear, bring forth') also show azero-grade consist-ently (e.g. asut, sasuua). it is assumed that this is the analogical formation to dbhut, bubhiva.See goto materialien1991,p.698,n.14,doyaa op.cit., n.4. For the pf. sasiva, see struNKeAi. babhiva, av. buuouuc: ein problem der perfktbildung im indo-iranischen" kz86,p.26.Thephenomenon is referedi3,88.moreover, sasuwa is enumeratedinv,74.8)cf. schaRF〓paninia accounts of the vedic subjunctive: let krnvaite' ij8,pp.71959)〓anv3,88bhusvos fini a piti sarvadhatuke87,gunah82, angasy,"The gunadoes not replace the vowel of the verbal stem of vbhu and su when the personal ending (tin)of sarvadhatuka-suffix which hasa an indicatory (it) immediately follows"10)according to vart.on v3,88,the rule in question is not applied to the secondary conjuga-tion such as desiderative, intensive.11)jamin"Two problems in the inflection of the vedic intensive" mSS42,p.4f., schaeFER dasIntensivum, p.212)in the traditonal grammar, a theoretical form which is not actually usedby the sistas is not de-sired (i.e. anabhidhona).onthis subiect, see ogawa process and language, p.271.for the ternanabhidhana, see kielHkl. schr.23413)pan. i3,12anudattanita atmanepadam middle endings are introduced after a verbal rootwhich has the anudutta-vowel or nvas indicatory (i14)les nipatna-sutra de paniniet questions diverses'eVi,p.112(keywords) vetie mntensve pann mpatnagraae sndem- tshogn lniveniny
