The japanese association of Indian and BuddhiStStudiesTsong kha pa on the prasangika view of TimeNEMoto hiroshi1the present paper deals with one of "the eight difficult issues' dka' gnas brgyad) whickTsong kha pa (1357-1419)thinks to be brought up by prasangika-Madhyamikas: how toposit the three time-divisions of past, present, and future is gsum).i song kha pa's view,prasangikas argue that each of the three times is an effective thing (chgos po) and is capableof producing an effect-this is the essential characteristic of theif view of the three times.although over the last decades several studies have been made on the subiect, 1〓 it has notbeen made clear on what grounds Tsong kha pa conceives of the prasangika's view oftimeas differentiated from those of other buddhist schools.2before moving on to the main task, it is useful to see what are the basic points to notin tsong kha pa's arguments about the three times. to begin with, time is not distinctfrom the factors which have a temporal existence. That is to say that there is no independ-ent entity called 〓past', 〓present', or future", apart from the factors which are assumedto exist in the three time-periods. This is an understanding of time that buddhist thinkershave in common. secondly, the vaibhasika view of time that factors existin all three time.periods is to be distinguished from the view of time held by other buddhist schools, Sau-trantika, yogacara, and madhyamika, which hold that factors exist only in the present. it isto be noted that in discussing the view of time held by these latter schools tsong kha pa as-sumes the three times to be defined as follows: the future is a thing's state of having not yetmrisen shyyes p), the present is its state of having arisen but having not yet ceased (skyesla ma 'ggs p), and the pastis its state of having ceased (zhig pa).In his assumption there are two points to note. first, in his view the future is not definedas that which will exist later, nor is the past defined as that which existed before. For exam-ple, the sprout which existed yesterday is notregarded as a past sprout, instead, the sprout'sstate of having ceased is said to be the past sprout. similarly, the sprout which will exist
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiestomorrow is not regarded as a future sprout, instead, the sprout's state of having not yetarisen is said to be the future sprout. secondly, tsong kha pa uses the word 〓present" inapeculiar sense. according to him, the sprout of yesterday satisfies the condition of beingthe present in the sense that it was in the state of having arisen yesterday. similarly, thesprout of tomorrow satisfies the condition of being the present in the sense that it will bein the state of having arisen tomorrow. what this shows is that in tsong kha pa's view theSautrantika, yogacara, and madhyamika schools hold that whatever exists at any particularmomment is a present entity, and being present means being existent at any particular mo-ment.
3.1it is interesting that, in tsong kha pa's analysis, the view of time held by the prasa-ngika school is to be distinguished from that held by the sautrantika, yogacara, and Sva-tantrika schools. in his view the fotmer school holds that the past and future are effectivethings, while the latter three schools hold that they are non-effective things (drgos med)which are existent but incapable of producing their effects.As we said earlier, the vaibhasika school holds that factors exist as real entities in thethree time periods of past, present and future. if the prasangika school argues that the pastand future ate effective things, is its positiono the three times identical with that of thevaibhasika school? on this question tsong kha pa makes the following remarks:[The Prasangika school's view oftimel], however, is different from [that ofl the vaibhasika, because[the prasangika schooll does not maintain that individual entities such as a sprout are establishedas[existing] ineach of the three temporal periods. according to the theory [oftime] advanced by thisschool e., the prasangika school], the three times are as follows: take, as an example, a sprout.The sprout is the present, its [state of] having ceased is the past, and the sprout's [ state of] havingnot arisen is the future-in general, even if a [main]cuse that produces the sprout exists, whenthere is no complete set of its subsidiarylcuses and conditions, the sprout does not arise at a certain place and time]( she tik chen,199a1-zholed.))what Tsong kha pa means to say is that, in the vaibhasika system, a sprout is consideredto be existent throughout the three temporal periods, and hence the future and past sproutsare respectively identified with the sprout existing in the future and the one existing in thepast. Therefore, it is held by this system that, just as the present sprout, both the future andpast sprouts are effective things. in the prasangika system, on the other hand, a sprout isconsidered to exist only in the present tine, what are considered to exist in the future and
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies34)tsong khapa on the prasangika view of time (h.nemoto)past are respectively the sprout's state of having not arisen and its state of having ceased.Itis important here to note the following: in tsong kha pa's view, while in the vaibhasi-ka systemm the future, present, and past are considered to be the three distinct states of oneand the same entity, in the prasaigika system they are considered to be the three distinctentities. moreover, according to him, a sprout's state of having not arisen and its state ofhaving ceased, which the latter school considers respectively as a future sprout and a pastsprout, are those which are causally conditioned and which bring about their effects, irother words, they are subjectto origination and cessation.3.2as Tsong kha pa understands it, the prasangika school holds the view that the pas1is the effective thing which is produced by its cause, and which ceases to exist after hav-ing produced its effect. to explain a sprout's state of having ceased (myu guzhig pa) ariseswhen the sprout has ceased to exist, and it ceases to exist, bringing about another state ofhaving ceased (myu gu zhigpzhig pa), the production of the state of having ceased occursina sequence. but a question arises. if the sprout's state of having ceased is existent at themoment when it has arisen but has not yet ceased (skyes la ma 'ggs pa), why can it be re-garded as the past, andnot as the present? tsong kha pa gives the following answer:Thus, no matter how many things of the same class as the past entity may arise, the [past entity] it-self must beposited [as the past]by [taking into consideration the fact that] the entity different [ fromthe past entity] has ceased, and hence, there is a great difference between [the past] and the othertwo times [ie., the present and future]. similarly, no matter how many things of the same class asthe future entity may arise, the [ future entity] itself must be posited [as the future ] only by [takinginto consideration the fact that] the entity different from the future entity]has not yet arisen; andhence, there is a great difference between [the future ] and the other two, i.e., the past and present(〓1sa she tik chen,196)The point is that even if a sprout's state of having ceased is in the state of having arisen,itmust be described as the past in view of the fact that the sprout, which is different fromthe state, has ceased. in addition, since the past and present are considered to be mutuallyexclusive ('gal ba), the sprout's state of having ceased cannot at the same time be the pastand the present. The same thing can be said of a sprout's state of having not yet arisen.Even if such a state of the sprout is in the state of having arisen, it mmust be described asthe future in view of the fact that the sprout, which is different from the state, has not yetarisen. For the same reason as in the state of having ceased, the sprout's state of having not
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesTsong kha pa on the prasangika view of time (h.nemoto)(vet arisen cannot at the same time be the future and the present. according to tsong khapa, this is how the prasangika school differentiates the past from the present and future; thefuture from the present and past.3.itis important to note that, in tsong kha pa's understanding, the sautrantika, yo-gacara, and svatantrika schools cannot agree with the prasangika school about the charac-teristics of the future and past. for, according to him, the fotmer schools hold that, becausethe future and past are what are intrinsically established, they cannot be posited as effectivethings, whereas the latter holds that, precisely because they are what lacks any intrinsic na-ture, they can be posited as effective things. tsong kha pa says:This way of positing the past and future is not acceptable in [the system which holds that] thingsare ihtrinsically established, but it is completely acceptable in the prasangika]system which doeslot accept even at the conventional level that things have their intrinsic natures. (r she tik chen11
In tsong kha pa's view, the sautrantika, Yogacara, and svatantrika schools hold thatan effective thing is what is intrinsically established (rang gi ngo bos grb pa), and what isintrinsically established is what can be obtained through analytical thinking. since no ef-fective thing can be obtained through analytic thinking when an entity has not yet arisen orwhen it has ceased, the future and past are not effective things. on the other hand, the pras-angika school holds that there is nothing which can be obtained through analytical think-ing, for all phenomena are mere nominal designations. itis, however, possible to designatean entity as an effective thing if and only if it is causally conditioned. since the future andpast are dependent on causes, one can designate them as effective things without seeking tcobtain them through analytic thinking. This is how this school can posit the future and pastas effective things.4s we have seen, the prasaigika view of tine, as Tsong kha pa understands it, differsfrom those of all other buddhist schools. First, it differs from the vaibhasika view of time:while vaibhasikas assert that such factors as a sprout are existent throughout the three tem-poral periods, prasaigikas hold the view that factors are existent only in the present. sec-ondly, it differs fron the view of time shared by sautrantikas, yogacaras, and Svatantrikas:the prasangikas, unlike the followers of these three schools, consider the future and past to
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesbe effective things. although tsong kha pa's understanding ofthe prasangika view of timeseems to be prima fucie realistic, what is important is that he tries to understand the viewwithin the framework of the prasangika theory that all phenomena lack an intrinsic natureand that what lacks an intrinsic nature can be regarded as an effective thing. it is in this re-spect that tsong kha pha considers the prasangika view of time as unique.Notes
1)see, in particulat, cozort, d. unique fenets of the mfiddile 〓ay onsequence school. snowLion. ithaca.19982)for further details of tsong kha pa's view on time, see nemoto, h. 〓Tsong kha pa on theThree times: new light on the buddhist Theoty of time, "ilogic and beliefin inihilos-opy. proceedings ofthe international seminurapril- ,6 warsaw ad bialowieiq,polandy. delhi (forthcoming).3)for further details of this argument, see rtsa she tik chen,10b6-112(cf. cozort199897-209)ad dgongs pg robgal,12726, Zholed. (cf. cozort199819-192<Key words> tsong kha pa, rtsa she fik chen, dus gsum, prasangika(Graduate student, hiroshima university)
