The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSacomparative study between the womb and the lotus sutra.Miraculous stupa apparitions, two simultaneous buddhas and related extraordinary narrationsElsa leGittimoIntroductory notesThis paper is related to the one i presented last year at the "57〓 congress of thejapanese association of indian and buddhist studies".1)while last year l discussed howand why the authors of the womb sutrahad exploited motives and ideas from thevimalakurtinirdesa, this year i wish to trace some of the parallels existing between the"stupa chapter" of the lotus and the womb sutra. whereas the lots is certainly one ofthe best known buddhist sutras, the womb belongs to a once influential but now fatherforgotten kind of buddhist sutras.3)The womb pretends to be sakyamuni's first and lastexposition, held when he was a fetus in his mother's womb and then again shortly beforehis nirvana.
Infuences from the lotus siitra in the womb sutraThe text comparative analysis I conducted on these two texts feveals that the lotusprecedes the womb, that the lotus was known to the authors of the womb and that thesewere inspired by certain elements or even full chapters of the lotus. despite certain minutethematic resemblances and amazing similarities the borrowed themes appear in the wombunder a vety different light.parti ofthe comparison-from the appearance of the stipa till the setting ofthe audiencein the womb the motives related to this first part are scattered in various chaptersnine,4) eleven,)thirteen6) and sixteen.7) the "stupasandarsanaparivarta" of thelotus starts with prabhutaratna tathagata's stupa coming out ofthe earth. the stupa thenremains suspended in the air and is magnificently described. in chapter eleven of the wombSakyamuni buddha lets usnisa-raia bodhisattva witness the miraculous apparition of sikhin
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesTathagata's seven-treasure stupa. He then lifts up the stupa and places it within the wombIn this text too, the stupa, its fence, ponds, and parks are minutely depicted. Further, inchapter sixteen of the womb a multitude of buddhas, all emanations of sakyamuni buddha,create an elevated seven-treasure altar over a pond and place a high seat on it. again, thealtar's decoration is beautifully depicted. we see that by means of sikhin tathagata'sstupa the authors of the womb try to compete with the fantastic stupa of prabhutaratna.The monument portrayals were probably standardized and therefore have only a limitedcomparative value. noteworthy is that whereas the stupa of the lotus appears by itself andvithout the intervention of sakyamuni, the one of the womb appears and is brought intothe womb by virtue of sakyamuni's volition.prabhutaratna tathagata's universe called Ratnavisuddha is located far away in the nadirdirection. in ancient times the tathagata expressed the wish that he wants to be presentevery time the lotus sutra is prcached. the auditors of the lofus request to see thisTathagata. The womb too narrates a unique nadir cosmology in the first part of its chapternine that is even titled complete body relic". ten ksetras located undemeath the eartlare described: the oh and 1 abound in complete body relics (ekaghana sariras全身舎利),and the 〓in fragmented body relics vaistarika relics碎身舍利).it is significant thatboth stupas are from the nadir, that both contain ekoghana relics, and that the nadir is itselfrelated to relics.The authors of the womb clearly inflated the relic issue.In the lotus sakyamuni then fills the universe with multiple tathagatas created from hisown form. with their bodhisattva retinues these shall be present at the following events.also chapters sixteen and thirteen of the womb start with sakyamuni buddha showingextraordinary apparitions. in chapter thirteen he transfoims all present bodhisattvas intofully equipped buddhas who preach by different mouths, but with the same voice. theemanation of countless tathagatas is however of minor comparative relevance as it alscappears in other sutras.Next, in the lotus sakyamuni emits a light ray from between his eyebrows enlighteningthe previously created tathagatas. in chapter sixteen of the womb sakyamuni first emitslight from his joints and pores. every light ray has one billion buddhaksetras. everybuddhaksetra has a buddha. next he emits light from his usnisinto countless billionsof buddhaksetras. This light is seen by the Ratna tathagata(寶如來).sakyamuni thenperforms a third light emission, towards the east into the " hot world'(炎世界)where there
The  uapaneSe sSociation ofIndian and BuddhiStStudiesis the country called 〓extraordinaty'(奇特)of the "deep meaning" tathagata(深義如來).light emissions and multiple buddhas created from light are also seenin other texts. herewe notice that the authors of the womb have strongly enhanced the attractive motive ofphysical light emission.Itmightnot sunprise that the reasons for the "foreign' bodhisattvas (and tathagatas) arrivalinor near) this world vary in the two texts. in the lotus the tathagatas say: we shouldgcto the saha world of the tathagata sakyamuni to see and worship the stupa containing thebody of prabhutaratna." upon seeing the light emission the ratna tathagata of the wombells his bodhisattvas: "down there sakyamuni tathagata is now staying in his mother'swomb, broadly explaining the deep and essential most superiof ddharma treasure(深要無上法藏)."the 〓deep meaning' tathagata of the womb when he sees the light tellshis bodhisattvas. "with a great appearance you should go to that world of sakyamunBuddha and listen to the endless dharma-treasure which is difficult to be conceived. Thebodhisattvas of that land will all become buddhas in one life." The double focus of theLotus lays on the worship of prabhutaratna and on the hearing of the lotus sutra. but irthe womb the bodhisattvas of two "preexisting' tathagatas (not emanations) are sent to healsakyamuni's exposition of the deep and essential supreme dharma treasure. this clearlyconfers an aura of superiority to sakyamuni's teaching.Basically both sutras do not accept more than one tathagata in the same world. in thelotus prabhutaratna is the exception to this rule. The other tathagatas are in fact seatedallover in surrounding space. The exposition of the womb takes place in the womb andserves the purpose of highlighting the buddha sakyamuni. the "foreign' tathagatas wereeclipsed from the scene of the dharma exposition.Both sutras further mention the greetings and wishes the various tathagatas requesttheir bodhisattvas to express in front of sakyamuni. in the lotus the tathagatas send theirassistants to sakyamuni with flower baskets and jewels telling their assistants: " bow to thebuddha and wish himin our name few sufferings, few illnesses, strength and the benefittolive among nice people. bring the best wishes to him, the bodhisattvas and the sravakas."The first group of bodhisattvas of chapter sixteen of the womb is told by Ratna tathagata:eYou all should go there, worship sakyamuni with respect and bring your greetings. alsogivemy personal greetings to him." The second group of bodhisattvas is requested by deepneaning" tathagata to ask the following: "is your virtue converting the beings day after
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesday? are you striving forwards and constantly walking around? are you in good health andstrong? are the living beings of your land easy to convert?" These formulas of politenessrepresent indeed attractive narratives. it is uncertain whether in this case the authors ofthe womb were directly influenced by the lotns, or whether the formulas rellect ancientstandard greeting expressions.Moreover, the bodhisattvas of the lotus are requested to say : "the tathagatasespectfully inform you about their wish to see the opening of this great stupa." chaptersixteen of the womb mentions the undisturbed minds of the auditors and their wish to hearthe tathagata's secret essence(祕要).again, the authors of the womb set the focus onsakyamuni's unique womb exposition'.Partiiof the comparisonThe two buddhas and the expostionofthe lawIn the lotus the opening of the stupa takes place under great pomp. sakyamuni separatesthe stipa into two parts by the index finger of his right hand, and opens it like a greagate. prabhutaratna appears seated, crossed legs, with dried out body members, like in ameditative state. he offers half of his seat to sakyamuni inviting him to sit down next tchim. Sakyamuni follows his invitation and explains how in ancient times he obtained thelotuis sutrg fron a ysi. The stupa section ends with a "final speech' on the mmerits of theLotus sutra.
In chapter sixteen of the womb the gods produces music and praise the tathagatasakyamuni tells Manusri: " stop this heavenly music! i want to expound the dharmaThe buddha arises in the world once every trillion kalpa. when this happens, it is likean udumbara flower."11)again, the authors of the womb underline the uniqueness ofthe womb exposition which was never expounded before by some other buddha or rsi.nevertheless, the authors of the womb sutra do not exclude, as it might first seem, thepossibility of two buddhas in one world. The " stupasandarsanaparivarta" exerted itsnfluence also on chapter twenty-seven of the womb sutrawhich relates the event oftwo buddhas appearing in this world.The "core expositions' of the two chapters have little incommon. The narrative of thewomb differs from that of the lotus. its assembly does not witness a past buddha's suddenappearance in sakyamuni's world. on the contrary, Sakyamuni first explains maniusri'spast buddhahood and then explicitely invites manjusri to show his past buddha body.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudieswithout separating from his seat Maniusri fetches his " Flower world'(華世界)13)bhis supernatural powers and brings it to the saha world into sakyamuni's mother wombassembly. The two buddha worlds do not bear signs of mutual obstruction. Maniusrishows on his body all the marks ofa buddha and is seated under the bodhi tree expoundingthe dharma. The bodhisattvas of his land beconne familiar with the buddha sakvamuni andrender homage to him with fragrances, flowers, banners and canopies. on the other hand,Sakyamuni's bodhisattvas render homage and make offerings to the buddha manjusri.The teaching expounded by one buddha is echoed by the other. They both stand up' fortather conventional early buddhist themes: non-arising, the smrpupasthanas, the path toawakening, sufferings, and emptiness. whereas in the lotus prabhutratna appears by hisown volition and his seat offer might also show that he ranks above sakyamuni, in thewomb there is a clear shift of authority, as in chapter sixteen sakyamuni buddha purposelyemits light for calling exterior auditors, and in chapter twenty-seven manjusri is explicitlyinvitedby Sakyamunito show his buddha body.PartIーThe events afiter the expostion of the lawIn the " stupasandarsanaparivarta" the natration continues with the sudden interventiorof prainkuta(智積)bodhisattva who had come fromprabhutaratna Tathagata's nadirworld. he suggests to "his' prabhutaratna buddha: 〓let us go back to our land."" butsakyamuni asks him to have a talk with his bodhisattva manjusri. prajnakuta is skepticwhether anybody could have grasped manjusri's previous expostion of the lotus sutraand asks him whether anybody was able to attain full buddhahood. here begins the stoyof how the little naga princess became a buddha. it is generally acknowledged that the"stupasandarsanaparivarta" originally consisted in two distinct parts and with ptajnakuta'sintervention begins the second part. The princess is said to transform herself into a malebodhisattva who attains buddhhood seated under a bodhi tree in a universe called vimala.Three thousand beings presentin the assembly receive the prediction of future buddhhood.In the womb sutra prainakuta bodhisattva appears in the chapter following the one onManiusri's transformation. He is introduced with a remark that he produced the roots ofall merits and defeated the devil's fury under a past buddha. after worshiping sakyamunibuddha he inquires about the six destinies and their relation to the defenses. the text thencontinues with an ancient indian mythological story on naga and garuda. The narrative has
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesbeen greatly transformed to fit the buddhist defense of non-killing. although prajnakutbodhisattva of the womb does not appear in the same chapter as the two simultaneousBuddhas, he emerges right after this event. both texts thus display a similar sequenceFurther analogies are that in both texts prainakuta is an active figure'14)and the discipleof some past buddha. the following stories both have a noga as protagonist, and in bothcases the narrations are witouth direct connection to the event of the two buddhas.The differences between the respective passages are also remarkable: despite the factthat both sutras focus on release, the lotus strongly underlines the aspects of faith andduna, for example by the jewel offered by the little princess to the buddha, whereas thewomb focuses on the eight defenses and on moral conduct. moreover, the lotus doesnot inform us whether prabhutaratna tathagata and his opened stupa returned to theirfespective previous states, but the womb tells us that manjusri returns to his previousform reappearing as a bodhisattva of sakyamuni buddha. his country too retutns to itsprevious quantity. The most striking difference is probably the fact that the role of thesecond buddha is held by a personage who is a bodhisattva of sakyamuni, and not bysome unrelated ancient relic tathagata. The authors of the womb sutra probably felt thatthe importance given to prabhutaratna tathagata in the lotus sutro was incompatible withtheir sakyamuni-centered world view.Final remarksThe comparative textual investigations presented in this paper relate to only a fractionof the available data. The analysis is intended as an example of how literary and ideationalprocesses can be demonstrated and interpreted. i hope that the present study could clarify,at least partially, why a certain buddhist community reacted to the lotus sutra the way itdid. in many instances we see that the authors of the womb are striving to confer a differentmessage to the data they borfowed from the lotus. one of their central concerns must havebeen to reinforce faith in sakyamuni buddha and to fully restore his supreme authority.For this purpose they intentionally exploited and transformed narrations of the lotus, aswell as ofother earlier sutras, which they thought were undermining sakyamuni's prestige.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesKotsuKi, haruaki(小槻晴明),sanskrit lotus sutra mamuscript fomuniversipy of ohyoGeneral library .4,2003, tokyo.legittio, elsa, anabysis ofthe pusa chutai jing苦薩處胎経(〓12,no.84),internationalcollege for postgraduate buddhist Studies, Phd thesis, 206, Tokyo, (publicationplanned in the series melanges chinois et boudumhiques of the institut belge des hautesEudes chinoises. bruxelles. i8).Toda, hirofumi(戸田宏文),sanskrit lotus sutra muscript from the national archives ofNepal ,1991,tokyo.7)for the citations from chapter sixteen of the womb sutra discussed in this first part of the1)"The vimalakirtinires's Narration on the amrt distribution and its exploitation by thepusa chutai jing's authors"", journal ofindion ad buddhist studies,2007,tokyo.2)the sutra heldby the bodhisatrva within the womb, the pus chutai jirg(書薩處胎経),t12,no.8p.125b25
3)the scripture was translated around the year4dby zhu fonian(佛念).in my doctoralhesis (cf. legittio,2006)inoted that there is sufficient intemal and external evidence thatindicates that the work is not a chinese composition.4)for chapter nine of the womb sutra cf. p.126.5)for chapter eleven cf. p.10322.6)for chapter thirteen cf.12-22,comparison cf. p.10-039a.8)for the sanskrit i have mainly used toa1991and kotsuki00.cf. also burnour1925.9)The origin and formation of this triangular motive association certainly deserves a detailedtuture study comprising all available sources10)The text says肉善which literally means tlesh-chignon'.11)cf. t12,no.8,p.10-5.12)the chapter on manjusn's metamorphosis(文殊身變化品),cf. p.1019.13)Inapreceding passage the same world is called "floral light"(花光世界).14)prainakuta, the "summit of wisdom' bodhisattva is a famous bodhisattva who appears alread)in archaic sutra translations as well as in later texts. exceptin the lotus, the womb sitrq and theuuhakaruncnirdeic ai jing大哀經,t13,no.398,tr. by dharmaraksa) in which he playsprotagonist roles, he is a passive and silent figure.〓
<key words)初期大乗仏教,竺佛念,lotus sitra,『處胎経』,二佛(ludwig-Maximillians-universitat munchen, post-doctoral reseacher)
