The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesSummation of Theravada-tradition versions and proof oflinkage to the northern textual traditionMaTSuMuRa JunkoIntroduction
The narrative of dipankara buddha's prophecy is told in many buddhist texts bothnorthern and southern, and because there is a plethora of different versions, itis not easy tograsp the historical correlations between them. although many scholars have examined nu-merous studies by others and done research on this narrative,1 as far as the versionilliterature is concerned, it seems that they have paid almost all their attention only to theone in jataka nidanakatha, as if they regarded itas representative of the traditional Thera-vadin narrative. however, even the nattatives of dipaikara buddha's prophecy, commonlycalled the sumedhakatha in pali literature and narrated in many pali texts, are not reallyuniform as has been supposed, but have many discrepancies. Therefore, in this article, bymaking a detailed survey and summation ofthe Sumedhakatha in pali literature, this authorwill attempt to show to what length the discrepancies of different texts go, and, what ismore, to indicate that there also exist versions which have close links to the northern texts1.List of the Sumedhakatha imaliLiteratureThe following is the list of Pali texts which narrate the sumedhakatha:(1)buddhavamsbvii. w87.(2)buddhavamsa-atthakatha (bv-a64,6-119,26)(3)jataka nidcnakatha 2,13-28,7).(4)apadanatthakatha ap-a.2,20-31,5.)thistext is identical with(3).(5)atthasalini,or dhammasangani-atthakatha s-a32 pata-graph68)says "here the durenidana chapter of the jataka commentary (Fausbol'a jataka l .pp.2-47) follows", and the whole text of the narrative is omitted. in the Thai royal edition(pp.4-70), however, the textis not omitted. but the prose sections are only included up tothe part cotresponding to ja i10,27,and thereafter, only the verses of bvii. wv.33-188follow. (6)cariyapitaka-atthakatha cp-a12,14,28).(7)dhammapadatthakathu
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhistStudies(dhp-a83,9-84,2):this is a very concise summary of the sumedhakatha.(8)mahubodhi-uamsa (Mhbv 2,1-10,9).(9)thupavamsa (Thup ed. jayawickrama148,8-153,18).(10)fi-nacarita by vanaratana me-dhankara (jina-c ed. by h.w.d.rouse, jpt/wv.8-62).(11)jinulankara (jinal ed. j. Gtay, wv.15-21).I spite of minor deviations, the sumedhakatha in the above listed texts has exactly thesame main plot. however, two stories found in the apadana exhibit fairly different ver-sions of the sumedhakatha. They will be discussed belowin section2.structure of the sumedhakathaThe most well-known Sumedhakatha inpali literature is the one in the jataka nidana-katha(3),and this seems to be regarded by scholars as representative ofthe sumedhakathaof the Theravadins. however, among pali commentary editors, the most authentic versionseems to be the metrical versionin bv together with the prose rendering foundin bv-a. itmust be noted that the authorof Ja declares as follows."n order to make the full significance of this statement explicit, the story of sumedha should benarrated here. even though it occurs in full in the buddhavamsa, on account of the fact that it ishanded down in metrical form, it is not quite clear. Therefore we shall narrate it with frequent state.ments explaining the stanzas." a2,29-33,trans. by n. a. Jayawickrama, pp. 3f.)and also, incp-a too, the following statement is found at the end of the sumed-hakatha.
" order to know[the story] here in detail. the whole buddhayas-pati must be narrated.however, for the people who would be put off by the myriad of details, the story is not narrated inwhole. Those who wish to know [the full account of the story] should consult the budthavomsa.The story which should be narrated here is also found in the atthasutini, the commentary on thedhammasangaha, andin the jatakatthakathd."cp-a16,8-14, trans. by author)This statement signifies that the author of cp-a meant to give an abbreviated version"of the story. it would seem that the metrical version of bv and the prose version in bv-acomprise the legitimate and detailed Sumedhakatha. However, this idea did not receivegreat attention by scholars, even though i. b. horner published a romanized text and anEnglish translation of bv-a. it may be because in the bv-a version of Sumedhakatha, thenarrative flow is interrupted by constant explications of and commentaries on vocabularyand phrases. So, it is rather unapproachable as it does not have a readable form like the ja
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSversion. therefore, this author extracted only the prose narrative parts in bv-a, correspond-ing to Ja structure, and created the first Japanese translation. s a result, it became cleaithat the two texts, bv-a and ja, which, at first glance, seem to be almost the same text,are different in many details: in some parts of Ja there are descriptions not found in bv-a,and vice versa. on the other hand, the bv-a version as a whole aims at being  perfect' andicomplete", containing all information about the Sumedhakatha. itis noteworthy that in thebv-a prose there are metrical verses of unknown origin.The synoptic structure of the sumedhakathain bv-a  pages and lines of bv-a text are givenin round brackets) is as follows:(〓)a brahman youth, Sumedha, inherited wealth from his parents(67,12-24).(〓)sumedha contemplates the right path(68,30-69,2).(i) sumedha contemplates theright path64-70,6).(〓) sumedha contemplates the right path(70,23-71,6).(v)sumedha determines renunciation(72,13-73,12).(vi) sumedha offers all his propertyto people, enters into the himalayas to practice asceticism and attains supemnatural pow-ars(74,13-33).(vi)*sumedha abandons a hut made of leaves and lives under trees(77,7-14).(vi)*sumedha abandons alms tours and lives on fruits in the forest(78,5-10)(〓x)*sumedha attains supernatural powers, dipaikara buddha appears in the world (78,29-33).in this place a full account ofdipankaras birth and attainment of enlightenmentis inserted. (x Sumedha does not notice the appearance of dipaikara buddha(83,18-20)(〓i) dipankara buddha reaches Ramma city; the residents of the city prepare for a greatoffering, sumedha comes to the city and asks the reason for preparations(84,11-85,2(xi) Sumedha takes on the task of repairing a muddy road. but before he completes thework, dipanikara buddha approaches. sumedha spreads his deerskin and bark garment onthe mud and lies down on it, also spreading his hair over the mud (85,35-87,23).(xii,Sumedha hopes that dipankara buddha and his disciples will walk on his back in order tokeep their feet unsullied by not stepping in the mud, and makes a vow to gain perfect en-lightenment by this sacrificial deed (90,1-8).(xiv) eight conditions to become a buddha(91,16-20).(xv) dipankara buddha prophesies that sumedha will be a buddha namedGotama (92,23-93,5).(xvi) (a)residents of Ramma city and dipankara buddha honorsumedha; thereafter, they enter the city , and dipaikata buddha and his disciples feceivegreat food offerings. (b) sumedha trusts dipankara buddha's prophecy and rejoices, hebecomes cognizant ofthe perfections which he must accomplish, and the gods of the whole
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesuniverse praise him(94,23-95,23).(xvi-a)*all the gods and other beings honor sumedhaand leave (99,4-9).(xvi-b)*sumedha exults at the prophecy and the great brahmas dis-play marvels (99,27-32).(xvii) sumedha trusts in his future enlightenment(102,16-23).(xvili) sumedha examines the conditions contributing to enlightenment, and becomescognizant of the perfection of generosity (3,31-104,4).(xix) the perfection of moral-ity(0,15-21).(xx)the perfection of renunciation6,20-29).(xxi) the perfection ofwisdom7,17-25).(xxii) the perfection ofeffort(,15-21).(xxili ) The perfection ofpatience (10,4-12).(xxiv) the perfection of truthsaying (110,6-14).(xxv) the perfec-tion ofresolution(1,9-16).(xxvi) The perfection ofamity (1,33-112,6).(xxvii) theperfection of equanimity(12,27-113,2).(xxvii) sumedha becomes aware of the wholethirty perfections, and thereupon the earth trembles(113,18-114,2).(xxix) residents ofRamma city ask dipankara buddha the teason for the earthquake (1134-115,14).(xxx)residents of ramma city reioice(11,34-39).(xxxi) being honored by the gods, Sumedhareturns to the himalayas(117,10-24).*These events do not appearin Ja.3.the sumedhakathaincp-a, Thup, and mhbvThe cp-a version contains the concise prose narration corresponding to (i),(vi),(xi),(xi),(xii) and (xv). the story ends with dipankara buddha's prophecy, and not everthe account of sumedha's returning to the himalayas is related. This seems to mean thatthese six parts are the important core of the story, and the detailed version' is just a greatlyenlarged story. The important fact is that the text shows word to word correspondence withthe prose narration of Ja and bv-a, as if it were an excerpt of the latter.The Thup version contains (i),a very short description corresponding to (ii)～(v)(〓i),(xi),(xi),(xii),(xv),(xvi ), a simple enumeration of the ten perfections corre-ponding to (xix)～(xxvii) and ends the story with the return of sumedha to the himala-yas. at the end of (xv),the verses from bv(vv.60-69)are cited. most of the prose textshows a striking agreemnent with bv-a.concerning mhbv, although there is no helpful translation for buddhist researchers,such asan english translation, there is, for this text portion, a japanese translation by ki-yotaka minami.) The sumedhakatha in mhbv contains(i),(vi),an abbreviation of (v)～(i)with a short account of dipankara's biography, (xi),(xii),(xii),(xv),(xvi-a),
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies(xvili)～(xxvii ), and (xxxi). it is obvious that the mhbv version is far closer to the jaand bv-a version than the two texts discussed above.Especially important is the paragraph (xii), where sumedha's vow to become abuddha is narrated. when this paragraph in mhbv is compared with the correspondingparagraphs inbv-a, ja, cp-a and Thup, the following facts are noticeable: bv-a90,1-8,Jai13,31-14,5ad Thup1525-30are almost identical, while cp-a14,18-24is muckshorter and does not have such close literal agreement. however, it does report Sumedha"s introspection as "sacuham icchissami imass bhagavato savako hutva aii' eva ki-lese ihopessami, kim mayham ekaken' eva samsaramahoghato nittharanen? (whatwould happen if i wished to become a disciple of this great master, and today, having thrown awaall worldly desires, i alone escape the sea (cycle) of transmigration2),and sumedha wishes noonly to save "many human beings' but the whole of living beings, including gods'. Thisthought, which has a connection with the mahayanistic idea of bodhisattvas' vow, is nofound i bv-a, jaor thup, but only in mhbv, which has exactly matching phrases. indeed,Mhbv gives a more elaborate description of the vow of Sumedha. it is interesting that inMhbv sumedha's introspection is expressed as pannakannoya codito. minami interpretsthis expression as'汚れなき智慧が訴えかけたのだった[pure knowledge appealedo him],,4)but the corresponding textin the simhalabodhivamsaya1,-15reads "bud-dhasriya daka praina namati purudu kanyava visin meheyanu labanne (having witnessedthe splendour of a buddha (sumedha was) urged by a maiden known to him, called praina)'.Thismeans that the sinhalese buddhists understand the word pannakanna literally as the imageof a maiden. would it be too much to assume that, there is an echo of the female bodhi-sattva of mahayana esoteric buddhismin this phrase?4.The sumedhakatha in the apadonqBecause of the great diversity in the northern buddhist telling of the account of dipan-kara buddha's prophecy, it cannot be discussed in detail here. however, the greatest dis-crepancy between the notthern transmission and the above-treated Theravada version maybe the motif of the preexistence of sakyamuni buddha, whose name is Sumati, megha,etc., at the time of dipankara buddha, who honors dipankara buddha by throwing lotusnlowers in his path(散華供養).the early visual expression of the account of dipankaraBuddha's prophecy can be confirmed in the Gandharan architectural bas reliefs, and free-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesstanding statues. many of them show the story with dipankara buddha in the middle,bodhisattva buying lotus flowers froma young girl, bodhisattva throwing the flowers, theflowers floating around the head of dipankara buddha, bodhisattva prostrating himself onthe ground and spreading his hair under dipankara buddha's feet, and bodhisattva wor-shipping dipankara buddha high in the air. however, the sumedhakatha, the pali versionof the account of dipankara buddha's prophecy, is generally believed not to include themotif of honoring dipankara buddha with lotus flowers. it was minoru seki who lookedat the apadana, and pointed out that there is a sumedha story which has the honoring ofdipankara buddha with lotus flowers.5The story which Seki alluded to was Theri-apadana no.26yasodhara"" (ap58412-590,30).yasodhara was, as is known, Gotama buddha's consort before his renuncia-tion of worldly life. She revealed that she became his wife in innumerable former livesand served him in various ways. in vv.41-57,is the following narration. in the dipaikaraBuddha's time she was a young brahman girl called Sumitta. when she saw the ascetic,sumedha, repairing the road upon which dipankara buddha was approaching, she hadfeelings of devotion for him, and gave him five ofthe eight lotus flowers in her hand. withthese flowers Sumedha honored dipanikara buddha, upon which dipaikara buddha proph-esied the other's future. dipaikara also revealed to sumitta. that she would be sumnedha'swife in his future life (in which he is gotama buddha), and would inherit and guard his teach-ings.
〓p, there is another text whichis also obviously related to the Sumedhakatha, namely, no.486, 'the confession of elder dhammaruci" p29,20-431,15).when Sumedhareceived the prophesy from dipankara buddha, elder dhammaruci was Sumedha's school-mate, whose name was megha. he becanne a disciple of dipankara buddha together withsumedha, but later he was led astray by an evil friend and committed matricide and otherheinous crimes. as a result of those, he had to transmigrate through lowly lives, and, in thepresent kqppa, he became a big fish, timingala, which approached a ship to get food. how-ever, when he heard the name gotama, which the merchants on the ship uttered for help,he recalled his former life and died. he was rebornina brahman family in savatti and wasnamed dhammaruci. at the age of seven, he became a novice at the jetavana monastery,and there he approached Gotama buddha three tines, each time, buddha addressed him," it has been along time, odhammaruci", at which he also responded, " it has been reallya
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieslong time since i've seen you'.ltis obvious that the above-mentioned two texts have close relationship with the north-ern version of the natrative of dipaikara buddha. in the story of yasodhara, the theme ofhonoring with lotus flowers is seen. and in the case of the dhammaruci storv. the link withthe mahovastu is obvious. a summary of the dipaikara buddha stoty in the mahauastu193,12-248,5, ed.by e. senart) is as follows:6.dipanikara was born as asonof a cakravartin king, arcimat, and his consort, Sudipa, in the capi.tal city, dipavati. after he attained Enlightenment he returned to visit dipavati out of mercy forhis parents. at that time, the previous existence of sakyamuni was a brahman youth called megha,who was one of 50students learning brahman studies, and who had a schoolmate called me-ghadatta. when megha completed his studies, he traveled around seeking the treasure to give hiseacher in gratitude, and he obtained500puronas. on the way back, he wanted to see the cakra-vartin king's capital, dipavati, and there he saw that people were bedecking the capital. then hemet a young btahman maiden called prakrti who had seven lotus flowers in a vase, and from herhe learned that the buddha had appeared in the world. He asked her to sell him five lotus flowers atthe price of50puranas. she gave him five lotus flowers on the condition that he would take her ashis wife in future existences until he attained perfect Enlightenment. Then, having seen dipaikaraBuddha, he made a vow to become a buddha and threw the five lotus flowers. These fowers stayecin the air surrounding dipankara buddha's face. prakrti also threw her two flowers, and they alsostayed in the air. Furthermore, megha bowed at dipaikara buddha's feet, and, wiped the buddha's[eet with his hait, wishing to attain perfect Enlightenment. knowing his wish, dipankara buddhapredicted that megha would become sakvamuni buddhain the future, after innumerable asankhye-ycs. megha told dipankara buddha's words to meghadatta and asked him to enter dipankara bud-dha's order with him, but meghadatta refused. meghadatta had an affair with another man's wife,and killed his own mother who remonstrated with him about it. he also committed other grievouscrimes, and he had to spend a long timein many hells. later, when megha attained perfect enlight-enment as the sakyamuni buddha, Meghadatta was teborn as a huge fish, timitimimgila, and wasabout to swallow a large ship with500merchants. caught upin fear, the merchants called out thename, "buddhal" and at that moment Meghadatta recalled the words of dipankara buddha whichhe heard from megha. he died at that place calling the namne, buddha. he was rebomn ina brahmanfamily in sravasti and was named dharmaruci. he entered sakyamuni buddha's order and com-pleted priestly training. one day, when he approached the Master (sakyamuni buddha), he wasaddressed by the master; "it has been a long time, odharmaruci.2 he replied, 〓o master, indeed ithas been a long time." This was repeated three times. to the other monks, who wondered at this cir-cumnstance, the master told the history of megha and meghadatta and revealed: "iwas the brahmaiyouth, megha, and this dharmanuci was meghadatta (aham c megho manano ncmena osi esc〓dharmaruci meghadutto, mvui27,12).although there is confusion about the names, Megha and meghadatta, it is vety obvi-
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesous that the story of dhammaruci inapis closely linked with that in mvu. the story ofdharmaruci is also found in the divyovadana, no.18"harmaruci", and in the zeng-yi-a-han-jing増壹阿含經,vol.11(2,59722-599c4), and a very short version is found inthe jing--yi-xiamg經律異相(t3,190c15-191a7).〓n div, dharmaruci was the big fishtimimgila in the life which he had just finished, and at the time of dipankara buddha, sa-kyamuni was a young brahman called sumati, and dharmaruci was his friend, mati. theyoung woman who gave lotus flowers to sumati was king vasava's daughter. she came tothe capital of king dipa, dipavati, in disguise, and she was saidto be an earlier incarnationof Yaso-dhara. The stories in the zeng-yi-a-han-jing and in the jing-u-yi-xiam differ evenmore from those in mvu or div.5.conclusion
As examined above. the sumedhakatha, or the Theravada traditional version of theaarrative of dipankara buddha's prophecy, is by no means only one narrative as has beengenerally believed. especially inap, there are stories which show clear relationships withnorthern versions. it may be that only the flower-offering and prophecy story without thehair-spreading motif also existed in the northern tradition. in a version of the story foundin the guo-qu-xian-zai-yin-guo-jing過去現在因果經(t3,620c23-623a23),dipankarabuddha gives the prophesy at the miracle of floating flowers, and then, with supernaturalpower, he makes the mud on which bodhisattva lies and spreads his hair, and dipanikarsbuddha again gives the prophecy. in some other texts, the prophecy is given after the hon-oring by flowers and the spreading of hair. as narratives, the order and contents of thesecomponents are quite unnatural and difficult to explain. even in Gandharan art, the com-plexity continues: there are stone reliefs of the dipankara buddha's prophecy without themotif of spreading of hair, for example, plate l in isao kurita's the gandhari, (t-kyo: nigensha,2003).in addition, plate649,ibid. is given as "unidentified", but it does havethe scene in which a man wipes a buddha's feet, which seems to be the scene from mvu ( thegray schist is damaged).In fact, there are mmany other visual representations of the story inother regions fron various periods which show these two motifs plus a variety of differentdetails. Seki argues that the original dipankara buddha prophecy narrative includes bothhonoring with flowers and spreading hair motifs, and that in the theravada tradition, oneof these two motifs is accidentally or intentionally omnitted.' however, when read with
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieScareful textual analysis, it is more logical to postulate that the two stories, one of flower-offering and one of hair-spreading have independent origins, and that they were combinedat a later date.1)fof ex.: chizen akanuma, "nentobutsu no kenkyu a study on dipankara buddha],bukkyokenkyu, vol.6,no.3(1925),pp.317-340, kaiio ishikawa, "〓nentobutsu shiso ni kansurukosatsu," shimizuyuz sensei koki kinen ronbunshu940),pp.345-366,ryugen tagaenentobutsu ni tsuite," kanakura hakushi koki kinen indogaku-bukkyogaku ronshu kyoto:Heirakujishoten,1966),pp.89-1082)junko matsumura, 〓The sumedhakatha in the buddhavamsatthakatha," kobe kokusaidaigakukivo kobe international umiversityreview),no.72(june 〓07),pp.15-32.3)kiyotaka minami. 〓annotated Translation of the mahubodhivams," kacho tankid-aigaku kenkyn kybulletinofkacho jumior college), no.32(dec.1987),pp.1-44)k. Minami, ibid, p.38.5)minoru Seki, " tooi innen ko.nidanakata nentoiukimonogatari no tokuisei," indog-aku bukhyogaku kenkyn journal of indian ad buddhist studies), vol.20,no.2(1972),pp.36-340.
6)an annotated Japanese translation of the dipankaravastu in mvu was published by setsuryoFukui: the mikkyo bunka, no.135(sep.1981),pp.128-99,no.136(dec.1981),pp.104-72;No.137(Feb.1982),pp.90-51,No.140dec.1982),pp.102-69.7)m. Seki, ibid, pp.833f.(The research for this article was supported by the grant-in-aid for scientific research cno.19520058 fromjsPs)<key words) sumedhakatha, dipankara, buddhavamsatthakatha, apadana, Mahavastu(professor. kobe international university, ph.d.)
