
69.	The Doctrine of the One Vehicle
Katayama Yumi
— 1250—
-1251-
It is well known that the Lotus Sutra {Saddharmapundarikasutra, abbreviated as SP) preaches the doctrine of the One Vehicle (ekayana) in the second chapter titled 4 Skillfulness? or 'Skilful means5 (upayakausalya). The question of what the doctrine is has been discussed from different points of view. The aim of the present paper is to examine the concept of
the One Vehicle from a fresh point of view, that is, from the point of view of the vow (pra fudhana) of the Tathagatas. For this purpose it is important to note the following verse-SP 11.101: dharmamukha kotisahasr aneke prakasayisyanti anagate "dhve / upadarsayanto imam ekayanam vaksyanti dharmam hi tathagatatve II
This verse occurs in the context of the vow of the Tathagatas. If it is interpreted in view 〇f the context, it will afford a clue to the above-mentioned question.
Bumouf and Kern give the following interpretations of the verse:
Bumouf [1852: 34]: “Ces Buddhas enseigneront dans l’avenir plusieurs milliers d，
introductions a la loi; parvenus a la dignite de Tathagata, ils exposeront la loi en mon-trant ce vehicule unique.”
Kern [1905: 53]: 'They are to expound in future days many thousand kotis of heads of the law; in their Tathagataship they shall teach the law by showing the sole vehicle before-mentioned.”
In the preceding verse (11.100) Sakyamuni Buddha says:
“Never has there been any being who, after hearing the law of those (leaders)，shall
not become Buddha; for this is the fixed vow of the Tathagatas: Let me, by accomplishing my course of duty, lead others to enlightenment. [Kern] (eko lpi sattvo na kadaci tesam srutvana dharmam na bhaveya buddhah / pranidhanam etad dhi tathagatanam caritva bodhaya carapayeyam //)
The vow of the Tathagatas is mentioned here. According to Sakyamuni Buddha, any one who hears the law from the Tathagatas can become Buddha, since they have made a vow: After following religious practices, I will have others follow the religious practices so that they may attain enlightenment (caritva bodhaya carapayeyam). In my view, the essence of the doctrine of the One Vehicle lies in this vow of the Tathagatas. For what SP 11.100 says clearly shows that the preaching of the law is made by the Tathagatas under this vow. Thus it is reasonable to interpret SP 11.101 as follows:
'They will expound in future days many thousand kotis of ways of entering the law {dharmamukha) in order to show the One Vehicle; it is for the purpose of having all creatures attain the Tathagataship {tathagatatve) that they will teach the law.J,
According to this verse as interpreted in this manner, the law the Tathagatas preach by adopting 'skillful means5, or ways of entering it, is just the One Vehicle, which their vow presupposes. The point made by SP 11.101 is that the Tathagatas preach the law, the doctrine of the One Vehicle, in order for all creatures to attain enlightenment {tathagatatve =
bodhaya).
7〇. On the 2nd Verse in the 7th Chapter of the Vimalakirlinirdesa-sutra
Iwamatsu Asao
The Vimala/drtinirdesa has verses collectively in two chapters, viz. the 1st and the 7th (or the 8th, of the Chinese). There are five versions of the Vimalaklrtinirdesa, that is, the Sanskrit, the Tibetan, and three in Chinese translated by Zhi Qian Kumarajlva
什 and Xuanzang 玄奘，respectively. Comparing these verses with each other，differences
are notably found in not a few verses, especially in those in the 7th Chap., and between the Sanskrit and the Chinese texts in particular. One of the most typical cases is no doubt the 2nd verse in the 7th Chap. The wording of each is as follows:
bharya dharmaratis tesam maitri karuna ca duhitarau | satyadharmav ubhau putrau grham sunyarthacintana || [7] 2 ||
/chos la dga，ba chung ma ste//byams dang snying rje bu mo yin/
ichos dang bden gnyis bu pho yin//stong pa5i don sems knyim yin no/
(支)楽法以為妻慈悲為男_女奉諦以降調居則思空義 (羅)法喜以為妻慈悲心為女善心誠実男畢竟空寂舎 (玄)妙法楽為妻大慈悲為女真実諦法男思空勝義舎
As is easily noticed, all three quarters (padas) except one are virtually the same. Only the third auarter (pada c) differs largely between the Sanskrit, Zhi Qian and Kumarajlva.
The present author attempts to restore the original Sanskrit from the two translations by Zhi Qian and Kumarajlva and to make clear the whole process of the change (or modinca-tion) from the earliest to the latest. His conclusions are as follows:
[©satyadantamanah putrah (the earliest and most original form ?) (Kumarajlva's original ?)]
I
(1)	satyadamyamanah putrah (> -dammamano pu° ?) (Zhi Qian^ original = °mano ?)
i
(2)	satyadharmamanah putrah (> -dhammamano pu° ?)
1252-
-1253-