 Thhee JaapapnaesneAessoeciaAtisosnociation off Indidainan andnd Buuddhdishtist Studuidesies
,Jburnal
On *nimitta
1. IntroductioR
andBudtihist StudiesVbL56,No.3,March 2008 (95) ofindian
and *dx.s.ti'nthe Mahdyanasamgraha MMsuDA Kuninori
Inthe'earlyYogEcEra school, theterm "nimitta" playsa very importanrtole indiscus- sions of ontology and epistemology. Whilethistermisused invarious contexts, one of the most importantexamples isthatintheMahllyanasapagrah(aMS)where 'nimitta isused
,
incontrast to'drs(i. Needlesstesay,thisusage of*nimitta and "cllrstii'sconsidered apre- cursor of thetheory ofcensciousness composed of fourpartsinthe subsequent Faxiang za *gschool.
Now,intheMS,Chap.ll,eleven representations ('vijn'arpeteinu)merated ascharacter-
isticosf ofrepresentation-only
Question:
(*vij-
aEparatantra
w
("that
 ("viifiuptimatrattr)
hic
h dependson others") and lateirnthesame wotk thetheory
,
isestahlished. Inthecourse ofits establishment,
itisexplained thatrepresentatiens are accompanied by two ponions,namely, *nimitta and .
"dusti. --d
Inconnection with thispassage,Nagao [1982p.:314] givesan explanation to theefliect
thatevery one ofthese eleven representations isdividedintothetwo *nimitta and portions
*drsti. Here the two portions*nimitta and *ds,Tti. seem to be,so to speak, subdivisions of therepresentation. Butcan therelationship betweenthesetwo and therepresentation really be likethis?
InthispaperIwould liketoreconsider therelationship betweentherepresentation and the pair "nimjtta and "drsFi by reexamining thedescriptionsgivenin the MS commentary, the MahdyanasaTngrahabhdsL,a (MSBh)
.
2. MSII.11
Firstw,eshallexamine thedescription intheMSII.11. given
C-only) and its
How isitestablished thattheserepresentations are represcntation-enly
-1131-
('vijn-apti)
NII-IE-leEctlreoncitcronic Library Service
 Thhee JaapapnaesneAessoeciaAtisosnociation off Indidainan andnd Buuddhdishtist Studuidesies
(96) On "nimitta aiid 'drsli inthe imhllydnasampgraka(K.MATsui}A)
fiaptimfitra)?
Answer:Itisestablishedinbriefromthreeaspects: (1)from[thaespect]thatheyarethat-only becausetheyhavene objects; from aspect] of twofoldnessbecausetherepresentation is
objects; and
(2)[threepresentation] isaccompanied bythe'nimitta and the*d?;.sti because,with
(2) [the
accompanied by the"nimitta and the 'dysgi; from aspect] thatvarious thingsarise at the (3) [the
same time because arise with various shapes. [rqpresentations]
In thisway, these representations are that-only of havingno (1) (representatiboenca-uesnely)
regard to representations of eye, etc., form,etc., turn intothe*nimitta and consciousness of that
'dts. (i,
(eyet)hroughtoconsciousness ofbody tum intothe and becausethemind-representation
isaccornpanied by the *nimitta with refk rence te all representations from eye through to *dharma
and jsaceompazied the mind-consciousness as representations.
by the*drs. tiwith reference to the representation of mind-conseiousness, fbr
isthe imagination and is by all thingswhich appear ('vikaipa) prodnced
Thereisa stanza regarding this:
Ybginshopetounderstand that-enltyw,ofoldness, and manifbldness. Ifone who hasentered into
themind-only leavesthat,thenalso leavesthe mind-only] [one
.
so-called representation-only
This isa passage which discussetsltreaespects
concerning
'nimitta and ('vijn-qptiamndatrhea),
sentation-only.
Moreover, "these representations"
the *clysti
are treated as portions cig) ofrepre- (cha
here refers to the eleven
thebodyand so on thatare explained intheMS II.2,which are characteristics ('laksa"a)
Here, as mentioned
ing effect: every one "nimitta and "drl.sti up
above, Nagao [1982p:.314] gives an explanation to the fo11ow- ofthese eleven representations・is accompanied by the two portions to II.12a,nd then itiscomprehensively explained inII.13thathe
as used
representations of
ofthe Inconcrete terms,theeighreen *cthatus arethoughttobemeant here. lparatantra.
representation of dlayavijn"'ihnaiasthetwo portions*nimitta and *drs. (i. However,thisinterpretatiseoenms somewhat dubious.The MS II.11mentioned above
explains only themutual relatienship among theeleven representations appearing as eigh-
teen *dhtttus,
subdivided In other
shown inTahle1,butdoesllot state tlrteacth of theeleven representations is
intotwo portrions.
words, only when the eye and so on appear as an object of the mind can they
turn intothe "nimitta, but itisnot the case that they are the "drsgi. Likewise, eye-con- sciousness and so on tuni intothe *drsti only when they grasptheirobjects, buttheyarc not said tobethe*nimitta inthatcase.
-1132-
NII-Electronic Library Service
 Thhee JaapapnaesneAessoeciaAtisosnociation off Indidainan andnd Buuddhdishtist Studuidesies
(2) (3)
eye,etc.
  mind
drstid-- .
eye-consclousness,etc.
  mind-consciousness
Table1
nimitta form,etc.
all
On 'nimitta and
"drsli
intheAddhdycrnasapagrah(aK.MATsuDA) (97)
I]nthismanner, the'nimitta and the*drFij only indicataemutual relationship among re-
. presentatlons.
3. MSBh ad MS ll.11
Next,we shall examine theMSBh on thi,s The MSBh states withregard to (2)(and point.
(3))as fo11ows:
Ahd the twofbldness will be established through the conscieusness ("vijnNacncaom)panied by
the"nimitta,and
the consciousiess accompanied bythe*ds. (iI.faponion (chgacig)of thesingie tms intothe"nimitta and another portionturnsintothe*drs,tit,hellagain the
representation-only
eye-consciousness
that single representatiorr-only, some portionarises suitably as various thingsand isgraspedby an- other inthatway. Moreover, becausctheyare graspedbyrnind-consciousness, therepresentations ofthatWhichbeginswitheye and ends with *ctharma turnintothe*nimitta; therefore,themind-
and so on are twofold and are established to be ofvarious natures; even so, in
consciousness issaid te bethe "dl:p,iti inthisway. Itisalso shown that they (representations)
are thecause o£ themind-consciousness because [thmeind-consciousness] doesnot make individual
decisionsA.ndbecauseother [consciousnemsakseesi]ndividuadlecisionashauttheirobjects, they haveno irnaginatio(n*vihal.pTah)ereforet,hatwhich isaccompanied by the imaginationiscalled the *drsli. lnthisway, itisestablished thatthisisrepreselltation-only.
(MSBhad MS II.11,D145al-bl)
Itiseonsidered thatthisdescriptiointheMSBh ad MS II.11states what we havear- gued with regard totheMS II.11ina simpler way.
representatiQn) Thatistosay, as forthesingle representation-only, some portion(i,e.,
turns intothe "nimitta and another turns intothe*dysti, i) and consequently thegraspingof objects isestablished.
Therefbre"some ponion" as used heremeans a representation as a member of represen- tatiensinthesense thatsome member of therepresentation-only, i.e.r,epresentations not accompanied by external objects, turnsintothe *nimitta and another turns intothe *dysti
according to the circumstances, but there isne need to assume that each of therepresenta- tionsissubdivided intothe "nimitta and the *drsti. 2)
-1133-
NII-Electronic Library Service
 Thhee JaapapnaesneAessoeciaAtisosnociation off Indidainan andnd Buuddhdishtist Studuidesies
(98) On "ni.mitta and *dris,lintheMbhltyanasarpgraha (K.MATsuDA)
4 . MS ll.13
Finally,we shallexamine inbriefthe"nimitta and the"d.n.ytiwithrespect todlayavi-
jnNana.
And insome cases the representation of alayavijfitisneastahlished as object representation. In
such cases tooitshould bcundersteed thatall other reprcsentativfis apart fromit(alayavijn-ana) turn intothe representation as the *nimitta forit,and thathe representation ofthe rnind-conscious-
ness with itsupport turns intothe *dts. (iforit.Because the representations that turn intothe 'niini-
(causeosf)the arising ef the
entations) function they ("nimitta
'nimitta
Herethephrase"the representatien of MayavijnNaniasestal]lished as object representa- tion" may probably be eonsidered to indicate,as Nagao [1982p.:314,note 1] shows, the
same situation as deseribeidntheA(tadkyantavibhaIg,ak.3,numely, thataiayavijn"anap- pearsas objects.
Inthiscase teo*nimitta means therepresentations and *drs(i means therepresentation ofmind-consciousness (anditsirpport), and at thesame timeitisclear thatbothare estab- lishedthreughtheirmutual relationship.3)
ttaare the
as a basisef theirarising when [representatapipeoarnsa]s theobjeets are. Inthisway, itisestablished thattheserepresentations are therepresentation-only.
5. Conclusion
Inthe ahovewe haveexamined the relationship
"nimitta and the *drs. and representation(-only) ti,
betweenthetwo portions,namely, the inthe MS and MSBh. As a result, we
may drawthefbllowincgonclusions. Inthesepassages,theponions "nimitta
thathave a re!ationship between thatwhich theyare established through the relationship
and *cij:s, tibasicallryefer totherepresentations isto be graspedand that which grasps,and
among representations consisting ofsense or-
gans,consciousnesses, and objects.
Furthermore,"portion" as used heredoesnot mean a subdivision of each represerrtation,
buta member, which isa representation, of therepresentation-only, thatis,eleven or some other mimber of representations not accompanied by external objects, and itisshown that some member, i.e.r,epresentation, turns intothe *nimitta and another turns intothe *drsti according to the circumstanees.
-1134-
"dlrz.slis,
re
pr
es
NII-Electronic Library Service
 Thhee JaapapnaesneAessoeciaAtisosnociation off Indidainan andnd Buuddhdishtist Studuidesies
On "nimitta and *d.n.sti inthe?vaZihilyanasarpgr(aKh.aMNrsuDA) (99)
Textsand Abbrevia,tions:
MS: 7Ldbhdyanasaptgraha.D: No.4048; P: No.5549; G. M. Nagao
(ftEEA) [1982][1987]: Shoddijo-ron:Wayakz{toenfikai,[[bkye,2vols. MSBh: A4ZihdyanasapagrahabhilDs:yNao.4050;P:
No.5551.
1) HoweverthereisadifferenceinthattheMSBh emphas{zes themind-consciousnesas the
'd?ts,vien thebasisofthe view thatthatwhich isaccompanied bytheimaginatioinsthe*drsg'i. 2 )Inthis connection itmay be noted thatAsvabhava cxplains inthe Mahdyanasamgraho-
that"being accompanied by the twe" means "coexisting with thetwoi' panibandhana(D223b2)
(clgeayisclang lhancigpa) .Thisstatement may also suggest thatthe *nimitta and the *dt:s, are 1'i
not subd{vjsions of therepresentatiens, butare dealtwith on thesame leveias the representa- tions.
3 ) As thephrase"in some cases,.." topic.Itonly shows thatthe "nimitta
vijn-ana.
"nimitta, *drs. 'vijnrvapti <Keywords> gi,
StudentU,niversityof[rbkyo. (Graduate
shows, this passagedoes not necessarily coneern the main and the'dts. (ican alsobeestablished with respect toalaya-
-1135-
JSPS Research Fellow
(DC2)
NII-Electronic Library Service
