The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSThe naksatra System in the vedic calendarSAkAMot-GoTo Junko1.[here is a sequelto "The vedic calendar and the rituals (1)"jibS5-3,2010,1117ff.In the vedic calendar until about the 〓 century b.c., the date is detemmined by the moon'sphase and position relative to the stars on or near its path. Special importance is set on twonights: amovasyd- rutri (later ratri-) 'the night in which the moon stays overnight (vas) athome (ama ),' i.e. "the night of the moon's conjunction with the sun, and paurnamasi-ratri (ratri-) "the full moon night in which the moon is in opposition to the sun.' These arethe sacred nights for upavasathd-"staying overnight near the sacrificial fire with religiousobservance' (hence, the uposatha in the buddhism/jinism) and, the next morning, the New orFull moon sacrifice as well as other srauta rituals are performed (cf. apss x2,8,etc.).It is, however, not easy to decide the amavasya or paurnamasi night. The period bet-ween two successive conjunctions with the sun i.e. lunationynodic month) is on averagcabout29. solar days. The moon's coniunction and opposition may occur any time, in thsnight as well as in the daylight. in the latter case a vexed question arises whether the preceding or the following night is valid as the amavasya or paurnamasi. it becomes all themore difficult as various factors change independently, i.e. time of sunset/-rise, time o1moonrise/-set, angle between the horizon and the ecliptic, divergence of the moo's orbitfrom the ecliptic. The problem is more serious for the amavasya night, for the thin moorin the twilight just before and after the coniunction may easily escape from the naked eye.even not disturbed by the weather. This difficulty required to watch the moon every nightwith careful attention. which brought forth the knowledge on its movement with referenceto the sun and the fixed stars. after the coniunction with the sun, the newly appeared moonmoves from west to east in its orbit, approaching every night a different star or star-group,until it joins again with the sun. The nights in which the moon is visible number on average〓8ia synodic month. The moon was thus considered to visit every night a different star(-group) situated on its path during28nights and to stay at home with the sun in the ama-vasva night. The stars as well as the sun at which the moon stays are named ndksatr-nt.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies"place (suffix -ta-/-atra-)t which [the moon] attains (naksa-'2)(commonly translate"Mondstation," "Mondhaus" or "lunar mansion").while the starin general is expressed by theword of indo-European originhster-), stor-(Rv strbhih, tarah), later taraka-V)and tara-l. Skt.), ndksatra- means "the heavenly bodies of special kind related to themoon,' originally inclusive of the sun as attested in the Rgveda [v(〓2.),then the re-markable star (-group)s situated approximately equidistant on or near the moon's path.)This notion itself must go back to very old times beyond vedic age, maybe to those of theIndo-european common stage, as the nebra Sky disk in the European bronze age(completed ca.1 .c.) suggests.4)As above mentioned, the moon visits 28naksatras (except the sun) ina synodic monthfrom which results the system of8nakstras. This model accessible to the common peopleseems have been favored in popular ceremonies(→3,6., 7.).on the other hand, the ob-server of celestial bodies recognized another cycle of the moon's movement related to thestar, i.e. the sidereal month o average ca.27.32solar days), which lead to the system of 27Naksatras. This more scientific model have prevailed among the priest-scholars (→5.).Each system has a defect: the28 naksatras based on the synodic month is disaccord withthe moon's relation to the stars, while the27 naksatras based on the sidereal month di-verges from the date of synodic month. Efforts to resolve this contradiction are revealed inthe yajurveda [Yv] texts examined below. leaving questions of the number aside, mem.bers ofthe naksatras seem to have been not fixed in their early stage except for several im.portant and characteristic star (-group)s such as kfttikas. they seem to have been system.atized as the popular worship of the naksatras developped and to have been partly takeninto the srauta rituals (〓2.ndksatra-in pl. is sometimes usedin generalized meaning assynonym for stor-ftaraka-→ or the heliacal rising, s.6.2.the rv, which has a strong tendency to avoid mentioning what concerns the night o.darkness, does not inform us much of the stars. beside stor-(7times in pl.), ndksatra- areattested10times: all the o forms in sg. (v67,6masc.; vii81,2,86,1,x88,13,111,7,16,4.)imply the sunsuirya-),ofthe 4 foms inpl. (,2,〓54,19,x68,11,85,2),the sense lunarmansion' is evident inX85,2of the sukta on the Moon's marriage with surya. in whichtwo naksatra names are mentioned: x85,13agha- 'evil' f.pl. and driuni- "silver colored'f.du.(～v〓〓x1,13 maghd- and phalguni-;〓3),s. ved. cal.(1)3.2.two vocatives pu-narvasu and revatihinx19,1 have nothing to do with the naksatra, the former is an epi-thet of agni and Soma, the latter of the cows. tisyd- m.sg. inv,13and X64,8is consid-
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSred as a different star from the6 naksatra tisyo-tisya-)The enigma hymni164,16implies krttika-f.pl. 'spinner women,' but not as a Naksatra.'Itis striking that the naksatras are enumerated only in supplementary parts of the athar-vaveda [v] and the black Yv (mantra- and prose-portion). They all begin with kfttikas(identified as pleiades situated at the spring equinox about 23b.c.) and show a remarkable af-finity to each other with regard to members, their order and divinities, they are divided intotwo groups:8Naksatras with abhijit and27without it, s. Synopsis at the end.8) Thoughabhijit is identified as vega (lyra a) by the classical astronomy, it is yet an open questionwhich star the vedic abhiiit is, for different stars are called by the same name as tisvd- androhimi-. vega (ecliptic latitude 4'ia.d.201) is too remote from the moon's orbit tobe a naksatra. cf. abhijit T5,2(〓7),abhijdyat and abhiiitm5(6It is also the name ofa Soma sacrifice perfommed in thed month of the Gavamayana.3.a list of〓 naksatras appears invxiX7in the Saunaka recension. This hymn fo1daily worship of naksatras(→7)belongs to the latest stratum ofthe av.1. citrami sokcm divf rocanani sarisrpami bhuame jovini turmisamd. vishva bandhu with v.1.turmichamn, whineY emends to astavimsam according to xiX8,〓9sumatim icchamano dhanigirbhih saparyami nakam.suhovam me kftiko rohinic bhadrommrgdsirah s orripinarvasu sunfta carupisyo e. w pusyo)  bhamuir aslesa opanam maghd me〓3.pinyam pirvophdilgunyau cutra hastas  ciri siva svatih sukho me astu racho visikhe suhova-niradhi jyesthosunaksatrcm aristam miiam.mnam piira rasantam me asadhi irjcm devy uiftaro ed. w yehy uitara) a vahant bhiin me rasatom pinyam e srapanah sravisthih kurvatam supustim〓ime mahdc chatibhisag variy  me dvayi prosthapada susdrma  revaif cisvaynjan bhdgan〓a me rayim bhdranyaa vahantu〓1.to [the naksatras which are] conspicuous, shining altogetherin heaven, swift and repeating tocreep in the universe, desiring protectionturmisam, s. above text andn.9) and favor, i pay hom.age day by day to the celestial vault (naka-) with songs of welcome. 2. kfttikas 'spinner women(No.1: f.pl.) and rohini reddy cow)'(no.2: f.sg.) be for me easy to call, mrgasiras "head ofabeast (esp. antelope)'(no.3n.sg.) be lucky, ardra "moist woman' (No.4fsg.) be auspicious.punarvasu "two men who have again wealth' (no.5:m.du.〓2.)be virile (unrta-),pusya 'onewho is to blossom"(no.6m.sg.) be lovely, aslesas "clinging women' (no.アf.pl.) be radianceMaghas 〓well-doing ones" (No.8m./.pl., rv agh-2.)be my way! 3. The former [and latter]Phalgunyau "two pale men" (no.9-10:m.du., rv ariui-〓2.)and hasta 〓hand' (no.11:m.sg.)be prosperous here, citra conspicuous woman' (no.12: f.sg.) be friendly, svati one who has goodducks' (no.13m.f.sg. ; mistya- 'outside one' in other lists) be comfortable for me! visakhe "two-forked couple" (no.14ff.du.) be successl anuradha "woman causing welfare' (no.15:f.sg.) beasy to call! jyestha the eldest woman (the principal wife)'(No.16: f.sg.) be possessed of a good
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesNaksatra, mula "root" (no.17n.sg.) be not to be hurt!4. let the former asadhas "unconquerablewomen' (no.18: f.pl. , cf. aigr224f.) bestow food upon me, let the latter [asadhas](no.19f.pl.), oh goddess (sg.), bring [me ] nourishmentl abhiiit victorious one" (no.20mff.sg.) be-stow the very merit upon mel let sravana ear' (no.21:m.sg.) and Sravisthas "the most famouswomen' (no.22:f. pl.) produce great prosperity ! 5. let satabhisaj healer of hundred (persons)(no.23:m./f.sg.) [bring] me great liberty, let two twofold prosthapada 〓two twofold feet of acamping bed' (no.2m.f.du.)(4 feet in total) [bring] me good shelter, let revati wealthy(woman)'(no.26 f.sg.〓2.)and asvayujau two persons who yoke horses' (no.27:m/.du.bring」 me a good share, let bharanyas 'bringing women" (no.28:f.pl.) bring me wealth4.The 27-29naksatras are enumerated with their divinities in the mantras for the brickssymbolizing each a naksatra (naksatrestaka-) piled on the 〓 layer of the fire-alter for theAgnicayana (agniciti ):in the Maitrayani Samhita [MS], kathaka-samhita [KS] andTaittiriya-Samnhita [T of the black Yv, but neither in the kapisthala-katha-samnhita,nor the white Yv. cf. the mantras in the Taittiriya-brahmana [I5(〓5).For eachbrick, a naksatra, a divinity and a common formula to all the bricks are uttered.KSxXXIx13:1301,10shows the most simple form with27naksatras:agnir devdto. krttika naksatram. prajidpatir devdto. rohini naksatram.  yamo devdto. apabhdramindksatram. 〓agne rcah stha. praiapates somasya dhutup. bhuyisam projanisiya. tena brchmanatena cchdndsa taya devdtaya-. ,hgirasvdd dhruvds sidata.The divinity [of this brick] is agni, the Naksatra is kfttikas. The divinity is praiapati, the naksatrais Rohini. . the divinity is Yama, the naksatra is apabharanis. "You (the naksatra bricks) are ra-diances of agni, of prajapati, Soma, [ and] dhatr. may i have more descendants! with this for-mula with realizing power (brahman-), with this metre, with this divinity, sit (pl.) steadily likeangiras.' (The mantras in quotation marks are repeated for each brick.)MSm〓13,20165,12-16,12mentions29naksatras conresponding to a synodic month:k tika ndksatram. agmir devdta-, agne ruicah sha praidpateh somasy dhatur. rce ta. ruce to.bhose td. jyotise ta. tena cchandsa tena brdhmana taya devdtayangirasvaid dhruvd si. rohinindksatram. praidpatir devdta. . abhiim haksatram. brahma devato. . bhdramir naksatrami. yamcdevdta. brahamano ndksatram. somo devata-. agne ricah sha.. dhruvd sid.The Naksatra [of this brick] is kfttikas, the divinity is agni. 〓You (pl. the Naksatra bricks) are raliances of agni, of prajapati, Soma [and] dhatr. for the hymn, [i place] you(sg. a naksatrabrick). for the radiance, [iplace] you. for the brightness, [Iplace] you. for the light, [Iplace] you. with this metre, with this fommula with realizing power, with this divinity, sit (sg.)steadily like angiras.' The Naksatra is Rohini, the divinity is prajapati.. the naksatra is abhijift,the divinity is brahman. the naksatra is bharanis, the divinity is Yama. the naksatra is brah.minbrahamand-),the divinity is soma. "You are radiances .. sit steadly like angiras.'28naksatras are similar with those in the av. The2N〓is not a heavenly body but the
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesBrahmin on earth, which implies that the moonin the amavasya night stay with the sun irthe sacrificial fire by the brahmin for the upavasatha and the new moon sacrifice〓1.).Cf. the common concept that the sun stays overnightin the fre (rvx88,6,tbp1,2,9,Sb〓13,1,3,etc.).the brahmin as a naksatra appears also T53,4(〓6., synopsis).The di-vinity for abhijit is God brahman(masc.), personified from the nt. brdihman-. This suggests relative late origin of this passage (cf. webr naxatra〓l379).god brahman is attestedalso in mSm〓i9,1 [agniciti] which, however, seems an interpolation from younger texts.TSmiv,13enumerates27naksatras but adds two mantras  pratika) for paurnamasl and amavasva taken from the new and Full moon sacrifices(Tsm〓5,lab～avv79,1,80,1; Manss v2,3,8)in order to adjust the naksatra number to a synodic month. boththe 〓d and1h naksatras are called Rohini , indra appears 3 times as divinity (citra, the l6Rohini, satabhisaj).The common formulas to all the bricks lack the last important part. al1these indicate to the secondary modification made by the taittiriyas:krttiko naksatram. agmfr devata-. age riica stha. praidpater dhatuih somasya. 'rce tv dyute tabhuse tva. jyotise tva. rohini naksatram. praiapatir devdtc. . rohimi maiksatram. indro deudto.apabharanir ncksatram. yamo devdto. pirna pascid. yaf te devi idudhuh.The naksatra [of this brick] is kfttikas, the divinity is agni. "You (pl. the Naksatra bricks) are ra.diances of agni, of prajapati, Soma [and] dhatr. For the hymc-),[I place] you (sg. a nsbrick). Forthe lightning, [i place] you (sg.).for the brightness, [iplace] you (sg.), For the light,[lplace] you (sg.).' The Naksatra is Rohini, the divinity is praiapati.. the n〓is rohini, the di-inity is Indra.. the n〓is apabharanis, the divinity is Yama. 〓fullin behind (west)…'(man-ta for paumamasi).'when the gods fixed you [ashare]…'(mantra for amavasya).How to pile the bricks is prescribed in the srauta-sutras, which deviates much or lessfrom the Mantras: [Manava-SSv2,3,8(Maitrayaniya school)]13naksatra bricksPaurnamasi bricknaksatra bricks beginning visakheamavasya brickbricks, [baudhayana-SS x46and apastamba-ss Xvii6,-10(taittiriya school)] thelPaurnamasi brickNaksatra bricks till visakheAmavasva bricknaksatrabricksthe 〓d paumnamasi brickbricks. The3bricks symbolize the ideal monthof 3nightsved. cal.(1)3.1.).MSS omits the29h Naksatra in the mS and cites thehymns for Paurnamasi and amavasva under the influence of the Taittiriyas. In the bSS andapsS, a month begins with the full moon night as in later calendar and two paurnamasibricks are used. in actual performance of the agnicayana,30 pebbles (sarkara-) instead otbricks are put on the surface of the 〓 layer, since the SS prescribes much more than thelecessary bricks for the construction of the fire altar (cf. sTaaL, Agnii493495).the man-
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiestras for the naksatra bricks are thus considered as a secondly inteppolation taken from theformulas for some secular cult of the Naksatras such as to be foundinm5,(→5.5.TbI5.1contains 27naksatras with their divinities as well as the mantra-pratikas forPaumnamasi and amavasva like TSm〓v0.but lacks the formula common to all the nak-satra bricks. This mantra-collection describes what is yonder (or after) and underneath (orbefore) each naksatra, which concerns popular ceremonies rather than Srauta rituals.Though long discussed, whether this text belongs to the agnicayana(→〓or the naksa-tra-istis Tbi(〓7)(cf. weber nakxtraii3f.; kihTS lxxvi, lxxxii),it is considered tobe independent from both the rituals andto serve for another kind of naksatra worship.agneh kgmikihsukrmparasto jpotir avastir pitrnim maghihdnth parastad apabhramso 'vdstot  aryamnh pirve philgui  ja pardstd ysbho 'vdstt hhdgasyotare〓 vahatva)pardstod vahamana avastt visvesam devanam uittarahbhiidyatpardistid abhtiramadstat. pirna pascid yat te devi adadhu ttikas belong to agni. the white-bright one [is] yonder(or: after), the light [is] underneath (or: before)..maghas belong to the Fathers. The crying peo.ple (in the funeral) [are] yonder, falling down of the dead) [is] undemeath. two fomer Phalu-guni belong to aryaman. the wife is yonder, anox (for the wedding feast) is undemneath. two lat-er [phalugunis] belong to bhaga. The goods as dowry [are] yonder, those who bring [the bride][are] undemneath. . two latter [asadhas] belong to the all-gods. what is conquering (nt. abhi-joyat) [is] yonder, the conquered (bhtitam) [is] underneath.. 'ull in behind (west)…when the gods fixed you [ share]…(for the phaluguni and the marriage, cf. Rv X85,13[→ved.cal.(1)3.2.], kausika-sutra 7,,apastamba-grhyasutral3,1ff.)6.Tb5,2andi5,3 have no relation to the preceding ti5,1but give various explana-tions of the naksatras which seem to have developed outside the srauta rituals: observa〓ion of heliacal rising of a naksatra probably for the amavasya night and the followingdaytime(〓ved. cal.(1)2.), prajapati composed of Naksatras, characteristics of each nak-satra inclusive of abhijit, theological etymology of taraka- and naksatr-→.2), divi-〓ion of the deva-naksatras (kfttikas ～visakhe) and the Yama-n〓 (Anuradhas ～apab-haranis), auspicious days and day-parts, brahmin as the2 Naksatra(→ synopsis), etc.15,2,1ff. yatpinyam naksatram d bat hurvitopavyynsm yi voi suirya udeti ttha naksatramnaiti yavati tatra suryo gdccher yotra jaghanyam pasyet  tavati kurvita yatkari stl pinyaha evdkurute l evcm ha vai yajnesumc satadyumnamc maisyo miravasayayamcakara〓abhiin mma naksatramuporistad asadhanmdstac chrondyai devasurah smyatta a devistdsmin naksatre 'bhydjaym what is an auspicious Naksatra, one should confirmbt truly/reallylurute, cf. k. hoFmann aufs.355) that when the dawn is approaching (iust before thesunrise).as soon as the sun rises, [one's sight] does not go to the naksatra. if there is one who
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSdoes that (astronomical observation) as his task (yatkar), one should do [ one's task], as long asthe sun would go where the last [star] would be seen. [it followes that] one does [ one's task] othe very auspicious day. in this way, verily, Matsya made Yainesu and satadyumna to start fromthe settlement [for migration]nirayasayayam cakora, cf. Rau staat14).… the Naksatra abhiji1by name [is] above (or: after) asadhas, and below (or. before) Srona. The devas and the asurasxere confronted. The devas conquered at this Naksatra. .7.Tbi1,1-3(mantra) ad(prose) treat the naksatra-istis, ie. the daily offerings to the28naksatras and the moon, sun, etc. during a month. according to the baudhSS XXvi3-4,this ritual begins at the amavasya night before the full moon situated at the 14hlisakha (librab)which occurs around the spring equinox about 900b.c. here is emonth long festival centering on the full moon at the spring equinox, cf "passover".1)cf. aigrii-2701ff. 17of.2)The etymology of ndksatra- was variously explained:from naks 'attain to heaven)'Tb15,2,5,ninukta 3,20,GRassMann,*n-ksatra- panini vi3,75(comp. with negative nd; schol. from ksar "flow' or ksi perish,' ie. "imperishable"), 'having ncgoveming power" SBii1,2,18f. (cf. nirukta 3,20),*nakt-fra- "die nacht schutzend" aurchtwebEr,* nakt-ksatra-"herrschaft uber die Nacht habend" bRuGann, aigriii233.etc.3In the jyotisa, the notion of the ndksatra- was transformed into the equally spaced27zones of theecliptic.
tic.4)The 32stars inclusive of the pleiades beside the crescent and the full moon arerecognized by h. MEleR die himmelsscheibe vo nebra, der geschmidete himmel22-31, spec,〓8f.; SchmidT-kaLR acta praehitorica et archaeologica42008.17f. The babylonian list of17(or18)constellations that the moon touches (MUL.apn's list vi. hungR and pingreE MULapin, archiv fur orientforschung, bh.2,67-71,144)is dated much later than the other mainlists of mUL.apin and is supposed to have originated under the infuence of the indian naksatrasFor the converse view, cf. pinGReE MUL.apin and vedic astronomy. Fs. sioberg.4444f. andHunGer and pinGrEe, astral Science in mesopotamia,31,72f. cf. further chinese " xiu sieou)(28unequal divisions of the celestial sphere based on stars near the equator) and arabian8 lunalnansions.5)from the elliptic pl. 'stars representedby the naksatras", for opposite views,cf. webeR Naxatra il267ff., GRassMan wb. rV s.v., Thieau astronomy 12f, etc.6)tisy-corresponds to jav. tistrii-m.) name of the star sirius as divinity, s. ForssMankZ82,1968,57ff.7)cf. thiem Fs. Schneider 3293.schr.956963.8)Theview that the27 naksatra system is original to which abhiit is added is widely shared, cf. webefNaxatra ii4-280.9)The number 28of the Naksatras is mentioned in the followinghymx8,2(only saunaka)astovinsani sivami sagmami sah yogam bhaicmtu me "let theniendly and helpful [naksatras] composedof8share togetherin my migratio6!(key words> astronomy, calendar, veda, noiksatra, amavasya, paurnamasi, agnicayanaret. associate professor, osaka city university; dr. de 3eme cycle, universite de Paris ii)
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS〓'-9,〓iL
[ples〓ixvyaSX〓yY〓9anp'j〓u〓(〓p mapu)
susa〓〓ne44usa〓.u up〓〓sa〓4〓〓9yanp'y/〓〓4ana)
〓syydsujsyys2円u wnswnu〓dsynss.〓y/〓〓-44sya)〓lv4pu)l4pu)p!44spa ) 〓〓〓〓=)
〓pnjaps sp〓
(〓pundn)
1vsyyq)spyq)(spyq)suusupyo
(〓pucn)
Tdsyunsryudpoinyusppnduu4mn
tdy suuspyd (pauopueui ou).0(〓yud)〓pun)
(〓8pnq)nnausupyd-d stunsrpydpyusyyd〓y sunippudnp'u〓(〓d-d
-pipl2)
〓yu〓ndy8
( itd-pdaps)
-〓s〓949s=
SV
ss
( tdspy1q)
-〓Ss
S
snsnsnd〓su
(1〓pp)
-〓pnnund
〓 mpundnoundnp'u〓g(〓4p
-〓n〓〓〓=
〓u snuqm〓
('vmos)(uos)(Tdmu)(td-mnu)
-〓isls-os ) yyam〓s〓ypau〓sawspiu〓s.u〓g(〓dd
-llll
un〓in〓
spy4ypiplpi
(1〓) syysy4yd(c)8787(8)
6〓7.〓qunn
〓i8L9aLgi mlSlXIXXxaSX〓〓giii mSW-XXSvSW
(〓〓gI  peuonueui1 snuiouup suu-.syn) senesnsisdouas
The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiSt StudieS[(eiesyn
1i0,gi ss8e uui,wpupsyu osuiapiupu('vuos)
spupuuq-6,
pppdpyisqd
〓p.ur/
(-puna)
supzpwqndnstininngsupipnqndnpipnqpdnsuinjpnqndpsuu4yqsau4pyqd(np-u)
mp-acppippl
〓inap
nninannp
〓〓snd) 〓〓〓
(pndpy -yd
sypndpuisoindeppdpmisod
sppndpniso,d
(ppdy(pp
〓(pp(pn(pn(pp-pfuupn9)spppdpnisoid
Td-vppdpuisidsgpndnmisotd〓dsypndpuiod
sppndnmisod sypndnuisod〓ap〓p.u.gv
〓4pu)
(〓4piu9)
〓qpps〓
I〓suqpnps〓s.g(td-nspa)
spvs4spl
pvisady
(-〓nusya)
(〓nvsta)
〓49〓49mo49
〓syt〓sv
jmo49
svuna49〓〓
(〓puyn.4q)
〓iwqnmuqn-
mawqnmiiqn〓s.0(tdupa)spupsp)spupsvp4mspmpsnsyupespnnspupsndj.61
(1dy-)
sytpsnsmppsnsypsdsymppsnsyuppstsyuppsyupusndTdj〓8i(td- jmd)
(〓11u)
〓y-papmumsy4panuuupy m44a〓ummuwmmw〓u
4pu)4pw)4pu4)(-vinpa)
〓uspmiedf〓yo〓puisaapiisa'uisf〓
(〓uu)
〓〓
〓s'0
〓u
〓p4upplp1plp
spupp,wnsupeunTd〓i
