The japanese asSOciation of Indian and buddhistStudieson the Lhasa Manuscript of satasahasrikoPrainaporamitaDENIyaYE Pannaloka1.IntroductionAs far as can be ascertained, the lhasa manuscript (S(S)l) and the kyushu universitymanuscript (S(S)kd),of the sanskrit versions of the satasahasrika prainaparamitadvitiyakhand(S(S)〓), are in palm-leaf form. other S(S)〓 manuscripts are preservedm paper.1 since2009,the S(S) lis accessible online at the homepage of the researchInstitute of Sanskrit Manuscripts and buddhist literature peking university.) the S(S)Lnanuscript is probably older than the S(S) kd manuscript. neither of these importantmanuscripts have been studied in detail to date.' an initial step is taken in the followingpages towards a brief and preliminary introduction to the S(S) l.The original s(S l was formerly available at the ethnic library, beijing, after it wasbrought from tibet with other sanskrit manuscripts in1961.4) it is currently kept in themuseum of Lhasa in tibetan autonomous regionar) after it was returned to Lhasafrom beijingin1993.2.nature ofLhasa manuscriptrISMblgives the lhasa Ms. the title"《十万頌般若経》梵文写本(原民族宮蔵梵文写本第1号)satasahasrika prainaparamita (collection of Sanskrit Mss. Fommerly pre-served in the china Ethnic library, No.1)." The name of the manuscript is given on thefirst folio (01),as "xXIX satasahasriko prajnaparamito ch.12-16),[hand-writtenin modemn devanagari letters).The Lhasa Ms. has 20 folios in total. Each folio generally comprises seven lines. twospaces ofeight characters are left for string holes.although the Lhasa Ms. is now online, some folios have been placed in the wrong orderor have been given the wrong folio number. For example, folio nos.01a and041b appear
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSonline in reverse order. The Ms. itself. however. is numbered in the correct order. Thelast four folios are againin the wrong order.(一号之四,(33)277-28 and(34)277b-〓80b).The leaves 278,279and280are in reverse order in the present array. The correctorder should be279279272727277b.The folios should eachbe given their correct folio numbers and those folio numbers should then be placed in thecorrect order following leaf no.137b(S(S) ed., ii-2,p.71,ln.5).The Lhasa Ms. is a well preserved Ms. with its leaves in a better condition than those ofthe kyushu universitykyudai) ms. The letters are neatly written and the meaning iseasily ascertainable in most cases. Though omissions and repetitions exist, more often thannot. these omissions and repetitions are noted and corrected within the text. although oc-casional onissions are seen, the lLhasa ms. contains the least number of omissions amongall dvitivakhanda manuscripts.The style of letters indicates its affnity to the proto-bengali-cum-proto-Maithili scriptwhich paleontologists date to somewhere between the 11 and1 centuries. hence, wecan assume that the origin of the lhasa ms. can be dated to the period during or prior tcthe 1hcentury.73.contents
The 280 folios of the lhasa ms contains the text of ch.12dvads parivarta), ch.13(trayodsaparivart[bhutiparivarta]),ch.1caturdasaparivartr pari-varta]), ch.1(pancadasaparivarta) and the early patt ofch.16(sodasaparivarta) of s(S)〓.
First dvadasaparivaria has a unique opening salutation as "namah sri candamaharosan-aya." instead of paying homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas (sarva-buddha-bodhisat-pebyah) as common to the prainaparamita class of texts and manuscripts the copyist ofthe lhasa Ms. pays homage to the deity named candamaharosana. The opening and clos-ing sentences of each chapter are as follows:The salutation at the beginning of ch.12 reads: "namah s candamaharosanoua. Thenthe text begins: prthividhaty-asattaya ayusman saradvatiputra purvantato bodhisattvonopaiti. prthividhatu-sunyataya purvantato bodhisattvo nopaiti."(01b).ch12endswith: " satasahasryh prajnoporamitoych parivartto dvadcsah." b).ch.13(subhutiparivarta) begins: "atha ayusmnsaradvatiputra dyusmantam subhutim etad avocat."
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies(〓0b3) and ends with: " satasahasryh prajnaparamitayah subhuti parivarttahtrayodasah." 157a7).ch.14(akra parivarta) begins: "atha khalu yovantas trisahasremahasahasre lokadhotau mahardjos te sarve aneka devaputra-koti-niyuta-sata-sahasraihsarddham tattraiva parsadi sannipatita abhuvan."(157a') and ends with " satasahasryaprajnaporamitaya dvitiyakande caturdasaparivarttah smaptah." (197b3)ch.15begins"atha khalu tesa devaputranam etad abhut." (17b3) and ends with "satasahasryahprajnaparamitoyah pancadasamah parivarttah."(226b4).Ch.16begins: "atha sakrasydevanamindrasyaitad abhut." (26b4) and ends (halfway) with: "punaraparam kausikabodhisattvena mahasattvena prajndparamita na rupud gavesitavy nanyatra rupadgavesitavya,na sabdd gavesitavya.."(276b8).Except for the absence of a few folios, the lhasa Ms. is a complete manuscript of theoriginal text it transcribes. in contrast, the kyudai Ms. is missing a greater number of foli-os.in reading dvitiyakhanda in the light of the Lhasa ms. and kyudai Ms., we observe thatthe new nepalese Manuscripts and kimura ed. (which seems to be mainly based on thenew nepalese manuscripts) contain a considerable number of mistranscriptions. Thesemanuscripts dating to1 or centuries also contain idiosyncratic deficiencies that oftenhinder the flow and understanding of the text. The two olar-leaf Manuscripts given here(presumably both belonging to the period prior to the13 century) provide the more accu-rate readings. again, the older manuscripts tend to be more consistent with the text con-tainedina bore jing大般若經初會(T220)[S(c], shes rb kyipha roltu phyinpstong phrag brgyap, (tpno.730)[S(c)],大般若經第二會(t220)[c], shesrab kyi pha roltu phyin stong phrag nyi shu inTPno.731[p(c)1]and(TTP no. 5188)[P(c2].Nevertheless, these older manuscripts too contain omissionsrepetitions and mistranscriptions. in some cases, however, the Lhasa ms. preserves theoriginal reading better than the kyudai Ms.The kimura ed. is the only printed version of S(S)〓. nevertheless, in my view, S(S)〓ed. ought to be re-edited in the light of the older materials contained in its chinese and ti-betan translations, and, the Lhasa and the kyudai manuscripts.Notes
*My special thanks are due to professor michael J. Mew for correcting my english and givingmany suggestions.1)a memo on the materials of satosahasrikprainaporamita, Takayasu kimura, buz
The japanese AsSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesGakuho(豊山学報),tokyo,2007,p.152ff.2)http://www.mldc.cnsanskritweb/ms.htm last accessed6september201).3)dr. hikata Ryusho "bonbun koshakyo zappo"(梵文古写経雑報),tetsugaku menpo(哲学年報)第2輯,九州大学哲学会,1941and ikeda kunitoshi"kyushu daigaku kitaku jumaniuhanyagyo shahon kenkyu"(九州大学寄託「十万頌般若経」写本研究),indogaku bukkvo-gaku kenkyu(印度学仏教学研究)(86),1995,pp.166-1694)Sanskrit Manuscripts in china, ernst steinkellner, beijing,2009:pp.261-280.5)This seems to be a recent identifictionas evidenced fromnumbers and letters.6)S(S)iekimura ed.), ed. kimura takayasu, tokyo,200,ii-3,(あとがき),p.233.7)S(S)lis written ina script similar to that of prajnaparamitaratnagunasancayagatha (no10736. Sanskrit Recensio fromasiatic society [of bengal]), ed. Yuyama akira, cambridge,1976,pp. xxiii-xxv and vimalakirtinirdesa and jnanalokalamkara frompotala Palace, ed. Matsu-nami Yoshihiro, tokyo,〓004,p.73.(Key words)lhasa Manuscript, satasahasrik prajnaparamita(Graduate student, kyushu university)
The japanese sSOciationof Indian and BuddhistStudies*This folio is misplacedfor 41a.
**s(s lomits fromhereto p.7 of S(S)〓ed.
