The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudiesSantaraksita's Interpretation ofthe sahopalambhaniyam proof Re-examinedMatSuOkahirokoTSbp66-67b292030[j103710-11567.-9,691.4-7]vaisamvedcnam e sd sy samvedanam dhruvam/tasmad avyatiriktamt tato va ma vibhidpyate /yatha miladhiyah svatma dvitiyo va yathodupahiladhivedanam cedam milakurasya veddnm71MatsuMoto(1980:288)reads this set of verses as follows:1.In the pratyaksapariccheda of his pramanaviniscaya dharmakirti gives two sorts otproofs of the non-difference (abhedd) between an object of a cognition and the cognitionof the object: from the two being necessarily perceived together (sahopalambhaniyama)and from the cognition's obiect consisting in a cognitionamvedana).1in the bahi-rarthapariksa of his tattvasangraha Santaraksita (c.725-788)devotes two verses to ex-plaining the sahopalambhamiyamaproof."[Major premise:] when a perception mveduna-upalubdhi) of some [cognition」 is necessarilya perception of some [object], that object is not different (avyatirikia) from the cognition, of doesnot differ na vibhidyate) from the cognition, just as the self-essence of the cognition of blue [isnot different from the cognition of blue], or the second moon [does not differ from the first moon[Minor premise:」] This perception of the cognition of blue (nil-dhi) is [necessarily] the percep-tion of the form of blue (nilakara).[conclusion:][Therefore, the form of blue is not different ordoes not differ from the cognition of blue.]according to MAtsuMoto(180279),4) santaraksita here intends to show that by the neg-ative particle a- in the word abheda in the proof dharmakirti means two kinds of negationparyudasa and prasajyapratisedha, so that this word may signify "identity' avyatirikia)and "mere negation of difference' na vibhidyate) between the image of blue (nilakara)and the cognition of blue (niladhi).in addition, MatsuMoto considers that the first exam-ple (drstanta), a pair of the cognition of blue and this cognition's own essence, is given toillustrate the identity and the second, a pair of the first moon and the second one appearing
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesto an erroneous cognition, is given to illustrate the mere negation of difference. it is obvi-ous that his inteppretationis infuenced by those by dharmottara and Tibetan scholars, whopay much attention to the question of which negation of the two is preferable for the wordabheda mentionedby dharmakirtiin the proofs in question.we must say, however, that the tattvasangrahapaniika by kamalasila (c.74-795),who is a direct disciple of santaraksita, does not support the view of matsumoto. the aimof this paper is thus to make clear how kamalasila interprets TSbP66-67,on the basis ofa newly edited text of TSP, to show that the disiunctive va in Santaraksita's argument toprove the non-difference between the image of blue and the cognition of blue is not used togive two interpretations of abheda but to show the mutual non-difference between them.2. kamalasila comments on kk.66-67as follows:TSPoTS b66-67j24-6,p231b12-15g567.10-17,691.18-25(a)ysy samvedanamyatsamvedanam(b)tad ewa yatsamvedanam yasya samvedanam miyamena nanyat tasmat prarhamayacchabdava-yad abhinnam krtam ekantena  td ditiyayacchabdavacyam8(c) yadva viparyayenabhedah sadhyah(d) etad uktam bhavati / yasmad aprthak yatsamvedanam ewa tat tasmad abhinnam/ yatha nilhih svasvabhavat/ yatha va taimirikainanapratibhasviya udupah candramah/(e) niladhivedanam cedam itipaksadharmopasamharah(f) dharmy atra milakarataddhiyau tyor abhinnatvam sadhyadharmah  yathoktah shopalambhamiyamo hetuh/(g) idrsa evacaryiye sahopalambhaniyamad ipyadu prayoge hetvartho 'bhipretah,〓
"(a) The word yatsamvedanam is [a tatpunusa compound] equivalent to the string yasya samvedn-am'cognition of x.'(b) if a cognition ofy is necessarily nothing other than a cognition of X, it is inevitably considerecthat y-the referent ofthe second yd yasya) -is not different (abhinna) fromX-the referentof the first yad yat-);(c)or conversely (viparyayena), it should be established that xis not different from y.(d)the following is meant: if x is never perceived separately fromy, xis not different fromy, justas a cognition of blue [is not different from the cognition's] own essence (svatmsvabha-va),or just as the second moonudupdrama), which appears to the cognition of apersonsuffering from eye-disease, [is not different from the first one].(e)by stating niladhivedanam cedcmnd this perception of a cognition of blue' a [proving]property is appliedto the subject of the argument in question paksadharmopasamhara).(f)in this argument, a subject property possessor dharmin) is both the image of blue (milakara)
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSand a cognition of blue, a property to be proved is the non-difference between these two, a logicalreason hetu) is 'being necessarily perceived together' (sahopalambhamiyama) as described [byDharmmakirti].(g) anexpression for the logical reason used by the great teacher [dharmakinti] in the formulatiorof the argument where the phrase sahopalambhaniyamat "because of being necessarily perceivedtogether' and such are employed has this very meaning.'lt is important to note (c).kamalasila paraphrases the phrase tot tato va na vibhidyate inverse 66cd as yadva viparyayenabhedch sudhyah. The word viparyaya means converseinverse.' lt is certain that, if viparyoya relation obtained between paryudasa and prasajy-apratisedha, matsuMoto's interpretation could not be categorically denied. but, by sayingviparyayena conversely,' kamalasila intends to say that when there is non-difference be-tween x and Y, the following must hold: xis not different from Y, y is not different fromx. consider the following statement by kamalasila:TSPonTS bP66-67[J213379,568.7-1692.22-693.1].(a)nahy atraikenaivopalambha ekopalambha ipy oyam artho 'bhipretch(b)kin tarhi / jnanaineyayoh parasparam eka evopalambho ma prthag iti / y eva hi jncnopalambhah s eva jneyasyay eva jneyasy saeva jnanasyeti yavat〓(a) for, here [in the argument in question], [even if the word saha can be taken as synonymouswith the word eka the same,] the following meaning cannot be intended to convey: ekopalambha"the same-perception' in the sense of "the perception just by the same entity' (ekenaivopalambhah)takes place,
(b) rather, the following meaning can be intended to convey: the perceptionupalambha) of acognition (nana) and that of an object of the cognition neya) are mutually (parcsparam) identi-al (eka) and not separate from each other  prthak).In shott, the perception of an object of acognition is the same as that of the cognition and the perception of the cognition is the same as thaof the object of the cognition.'we must note (b),in which by saying parasparam "mutually' kamalasila makes thepoint that when there is non-difference between X and Y, the following both must hold: Xis not different from y, Y is not different fromx. he states that the perceptionupalam-bha) of a cognition (inana) and that of an object of the cognition (ineya) are mutually(parasparam) identical (eko) and not separate from each other aprthak). 〓acognitionof x'and 'a cognition of Y'in santaraksita's argument correspond to "the perception of acognition' and 'the perception ofan object of the cognition,' respectively. ifthe cognitiorof x and the cognition of Y are mutually identical, then it must be said that x and Y are
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiessantaraksita's interpretation of the sahopalambhamiyama proof Re-examined (H. Matsuokamutually identical.3.as I said earlier, MatsuMoto holds that the second example in Santaraksita's argumentis given to illustrate abhed as "mere negation of difference.' it is difficult to bring forwardevidence to show this. consider the following statement by kamalasila.TSPonTSbP66-67[j278,231b17-23,6.20-24,692.-10](a)candratayasya sahopalambhubhimano sti loke /(b) nca tayor bhedo sti paramarthatch/(c) athaca saha sasidvayam upalambhamaha itivaktaro bhavanti /(d) evam ihapi jnanad avyotiriktam api bahir iva bhasamanam okaram dvitiyam krtva kalpitabhe-danibandhanah sahasabh prayuktch/(e)na hi sarvah sabdo vyavaharo yathavastunivesi / yen sahasabdaprayogamatrena vastuprati-baddhasya lingasyanyatvam syt/"(a) The world has the belief that two moons are perceived together.(b) but, from the ultimate point of view, there is no difference between the two.(c)[objection:] people say: "we perceive two moons together (sha sasidvayam upalambhamahe)."
(d) [answer] evenso, in this case also, they use the word saha together' on the basis of the conceptually posited difference between the two moons, treating the image of the second moon, whichappears to the lerroneous] cognition and which is not different yatirikia) from the cognition, asif it were an extemnal entity.(e) Indeed, any verbal activity does not enter into a relation with an entity as it really is. otherwise,the logical reason [sahopalambhamiyama], which is essentially connected with a real entity, woulcbe of quite a different nature simply because the word saha is used."aperson suffering from eye-disease sees a double moon. in this case it is said that there isno difference between two moons. The difference is merely something conceptually posited. letus note (d). kamalasila states that the second image (dvitiyam akaram) ofa moonappearing to the erroneous cognition, is not different from this erroneous cognition inanadavyatiriktam).This statement suggests how it is to be explained that the second moon isnot different from the first moon. now suppose that two moon-images appear to the erro-neous cognition. it must be the case that, as the second image of a moon is not differentfrom the cognition, so the first image of a moon is also not different from the cognition.This cognition is single. Thus it follows that the second image of a moon is not differentfrom the first image of a moon, namely that the second moon is not different from the firstmoonvyatirikta). This naturally implies that the description of the relation between the
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSSantaraksita's lntetpretation of the sahopalambhamivam proof Re-examined (H. matsuoka)(1(second and first moons for which the phrase n vibhictyate is used is equivalent to that forwhich the word anyatiriktais employed.4.we have seen how kamalasila interprets TSbp66-67.〓n the basis of kamalasila'scomments on the set of verses, we may reasonably say the following. it is unlikely thatSantaraksita takes the term abhedindharmakirti's sahopalambhamiyama proof in viewof the two functions of the negative particle. santaraksita lays stress on the mutual non-dif-ference betweenan object of a cognition and the cognition of the object: the former is notdifferent from the latter; the latter is not different from the former. The difference is merelya conceptual construct.<notes)
1)Pvin3914-40,45.2)Jpb, rig p t, vedanat g.3)MatsuMoto has rendered yatsamvedanam ik.66a as  a perception (smvedana-upalabdlni)of some [cognition].' but this rendering is inaccurate. it is proper to translate the text for thepervasion as follows: "if a perception of Y is necessarily a perception of X,Y is not differentfromXor X does not differ from y.'4)kaiyaa(1982:59,60)and lwata(991184)agree with matsumoto.5)prafikas in the following text are indicated in bold type.6)em; n.e. g, 〓n mvedunam j, y smvedanmb.7)jP, ins. /GB.8)em, dvitiyam vc- jpGb9)ycsmad aprthak yatsampedanam em1, ysy'c yasmad aprthak samvedunam em, gang zhiggang ls logs shig mpar rigpt, y yasmad aprihak samvedanam g, yasmad aprthaksamvedanam jpb.10)jbpratibhabhsg.11)Jp, kho 〓b gnyis dmigs zhes bya bar t, sasiduayopalambhat suheti gb.<literature and abbreviations)B: s. sastri's ed. of TS/TSP. varanasi1-1982.bp. bahirarthapariksa.ge. krsnamacarya'sed. of TS/tSP, baroda1926.〓a1991 takashi iwata, sahopalambhaniyama, stuttgart. j:Jaisalmer mss of TS/TSP.kajiyaa18Yuichi kajiyama, "chugan-Shiso no Rekishi toBunken" [n japanese]. in a. Hirakawa/y. kaya/j. takasaki (eds.), kdio-bukkvo7.Tokyo,1-83.MatsuMoto1980. Shiro Matsumoto, "sahopalambha-miyama," soto-hu kenkuikivo12,65-298().〓 patan Mss of TS/Sp.pvine. Steinkellner's ed. of the prama-uavinisca2,beijing-vienna07.t tibetan.tS: tattvasangraha santaraksita).TSFTatnvcsangrahapamjiko kamalasila)
The japanese associat ion of indian and Budchist studies62)sananiksiais hepreurionoftescpalmbhaicmaprof Reexamined (h ka(nhnis wok wes parialystpporedbyagan-in-aidfor ss felows)key werts) santarksia, kamalsla, tanwsaigrcha. tascgrhrotjka, bahianha-pariksa, sahopalambhaniyamaGgraduate stdent, hiroshima university, JsPs Research Fellow)
