The  uapanese sSOciation ofIndian and buddhiststudiesamiksa andpaysyd:Processing of fermented milk in ancient indiaNishiMURa Naoko0.Fermented milkinancient india: dadhi- and ddncana-we find various kinds of dairy productin indian literature since the oldest religious textsknown as veda. almost all products are processed based on dudhi which is produced byfermentation caused by lactic acid bacteria. dadhiis the old form of Hindi duhi. Fresh milkchanges into dadhi through the activity of lactobacilli. ancient aryas knew how to fermentmilk intentionally by means of a "starter," which is called dtancana-coagulant' in theveda.
1. samnoyyd-, amiksa-, payasya-dadhiis not only an offering in itself, but also a material for some further products suchis samnayyd-, amiksa-, and poyasya-. Some scholars regard these words as synonymsbut this has not vet been verified.1.1. samnoyya-, lit. "the putting together"samnoyya is a mixture of dadhi with boiled milk (srtd) used as an offering in the newMoon Sacrifice. ' dadhiis made of the milk milked in the evening of the preparatory day(upavasatha) anda coagulant added to it.4srtais milked and boiled in the early momingon the day of the main sacrifice.〓 They are mixed just before the oblation, so any visiblechange does not seem to be brought about by the functioning of lactic acid bacteria.1.2.dmikso-the mixinginto?amiksa, also, is a mixture of dadhi with srt (boiled milk) which are prepared in thewvening on the day of preparation, and the early momning on the day of the main sacrifice,espectively.  dadhiis, however, added into srta when it is boiling. heat and acid have aninfluence on milk proteins and cause them to coagulate. curd anda liquid separate out. The
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesfommer is amiksa, so thatit seems to be something like a cottage cheese. the latter is calledvaiina, which could be whey .81.3.amiksa and pqyasyi obelonging to milk':alegend of dirghajihvi, witch 〓long,tongued""
amiksa and payasya could be the same products for some reasons: e.g. opayasya ismade in the same way as amiksa,payasya is associated with voiina (whey);③themilking for amiksa and that ofpaysya are done via the same procedure."Moreover, their identity will be shown in the legend of dirghajihvi, witch "long-tongued." This legend describes the origin of payasya and its outer appearance.1)in theKS version of this story, the concluding sentence refers to amiksa in the same context asyasya.1)o the other hand, sbiv,5,18-19 agnistoma, Savaniyapurodasa] showsa opposite pattern of the ks, that is, the word payasya appears in the discussion aboutimikso. the kS and sb seemto regard the words as synonymous. note that we can findthe word " apupa-" instead of purodsa-in section9.apupa is no less a pancake made ofunpolished rice or barley than purodusa is. The latter appears just as an offering, whereasthe former is an ordinary food. we could infer that there is the similar difference betweenamiksa and payasya as that between purodusa and apupa.2.distribution of amiksa- andpayasyd-invedaFurthemmore, we find in the caturmasya chapter that all the black Yaiurveda schools de-scribe amiksa as an offering for all-Gods (visve devah) in the Vaisvadeva sacrifice andthat for marutsvaruna) in the varunapraghasa, although the white Yv and kausitakischools prescribe payasya as the offering for the same deities in the same sacrifices (table1).simmilar contrast could be found in the context of the daksayana new-Moon sacrificebetween the faittiriya school of the black Yv and the vaiasanevin school, i.e. the whiteYv. Among the yv schools, only the taittiriyas and the vajasaneyins transmit daksayanasacrifice. which is a variation of the new-and full-moon sacrifice. The formner schoolseems to belong to a later layer in the conservative black Yv.3) the latter has a wealth ofinnovation in ritualistic intenpretation and theological discussion. in other words, a gap ofgeneration or ritualistic development seems to be reflected in the occurances of both thewords in the yv schools.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesTable l miksa and payasvaicaturmasya and daksayanawe could also observe this tendency in the whole of veda. Inquiring into a distributiorof these two words, amiksa and payasya, through all the vedic literature, we may observethat the later period the text belongs to, the stronger the tendency for payasya to appearmore than amiksaTable 2).Table 2 amiksa: payasya the ratio of their occurrences(Shadowed: pavsva occurs more than amiksa, dash: no occurrence, diagonal: no transmitted text.used e-text: vadhsrsu by prof. Y. Ikari, baudh- and apsrsu by dr. M. FuSHIMI, asv-and sankhsr-suby prof. M. tokuNaga.)〓n the basis of these considerations, amiksa and paysva seem to be the same, i.e., a
The japanese asSociation of Indian and Buddhist Studiescurd made of fermented milk, whereas samnayva is a pure mixture of fermented milk withboiled one. for the solution about difference between amiksa and payasya, some clues arefound: first, we might infer that a feminine action noun amiks"the mixing into' <a-miks) was qualified by addition of the adjective payasyd-, derived frompoys- milkand indicates that it deals with a dairy product, and that later, the adiective came alone tobe used.14)
Second, i would like to point out a possibility that amiksa or payasya has a relationshipwith soma sacrifice.as I have already mentioned, occurrences of payasya- are rather rarein the black Yv texts. Those occurrences are found in the chapter of Soma Sacrifie andkamyesti (Sacrifice for wish).In the former, payasva appears in the context of pratahsa-〓aa (cf.1.3.) and a set of five kinds of offering (purodasapankti or savaniya-puroddsa,cf.1.3.).In the trtiyasavana (cf. n.12),they offer asir, i.e., a mixture ofmilk with somajuice. asir- is a root noun from a-sray'sri *mix into',1) and originally to have a simila1meaning to amiksa-. Further supposition brings us a hypothesis: amiksa and dsir form apair, the former 'a mixture' ofmilk with milk, and the latter of soma with milk. Moreover,it might be the word paysya- that emphasises both milk elements in amiksa. however, weneed to more examine about the relationship between amiksa and dsir. in any case. theabove mentioned would correlate with the process of compiling a ritual literature and ritu-alistic development, and could be linked with the aryas' expansion in the subcontinenwith a shift of their nomadic lifestyle to the non-nomadic one1)the fermented remnant of the agmihotra offering is usually employed as dtancana. agmihotrais a vedic ritual held twice a day: in the evening and morning. boiled milk is offered into thethavanina fire. according to tsii5,5-6 and apsrsu I14,1-2, several species of plants areemployed as substitutes for otancama: kiual-kvl-zyphus juiube), tanduld- 'unpolishecrice or barley, ' parnayalkoi- (bark of butea frondosa), and putika- (probavely caesalpinicbonduc. roxb, cf. kuipER "was the putika a mushroom2"Fs. dandekar (delhi,1984),219227).ihave to omit the result of the investigation into atancana- for want of space.2)e.g. 〓TlInGk-Roth, sanskrir-worierbuch852-1875),RENou, Vocabulaire du rituelvedique(1954),MYlIus, Sanskritischer index der jungvedischen namen ud sachen9761977)ss.vv.
3)samnayra is regarded as an offering for indra in the special new-Moon Sacrifice in thesystematised framework of later srauta ritual. in the ordinary new-Moon sacrifice, the pancake(purodasa) for indra-agni became usual. cf. nisHiMuRA, Grazing cows and mowing the
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesscrificial grsudy of the mamtra collections of the yoiurved-samhitos and theirbrahmans-(tohoku university press, 2006,in japanese), the parts citedinn.13.4)MSIv1,35,8-1mprcvadhym rtavarir  urmina madhumattamahprncatih payascpo mancra dhancsa sutave (no parallelin the mSti. pratinoyati. sytatuova. srtcikamdhi deud. <indrana na bhagom somenatamacm32,10-11)ii. somam evainat karoti. taisy〓 noi somapithoh smtato ya evaim vidhant samnaym pibati." [The adhvaryu priest recites<Mix yourselves ( waters) completely, o those who follow the cosmic law, with undulating[milk]. [mix yourselves] as the ones having most honey, while mixing the [cos']milk witlthe [grasses'」milk, as the pleasant ones for acquisition of property.〓e adds [the water intothe milk].[it serves] for the state of having been boiled. For the gods are fond of what has beenboiled. [he recites.]For indra, i coagulate you with soma, as [his] portion.〓e] makes thisone(:milk) into soma (as a result of this recitation). his (:the sacrificer's) effect of drinkingsoma, on the other side, is verily continued, if he, knowing thus, drinks samoyya."～kSxxX,Tbp cf. baudhsrsui5,7-10,psrui1,10-11,13-15,katysrui2,3etc.
5)e.g. apsrsu1,8upadhaya kapalami sayamdohavat pratardoham dohayati. l atancanapidhane midhanammivcrtate.〓after having set up the dishes (for the pancakes),[the adh.varyu priest] makes [the milker」 milk for the morning milking [in the same way] as the eve.ing milking. coagulating and covering up [of the milk pot], and putting down as well arsomitted."
6)apsrsui3-mavadaya dohabhcmdhno vadya srisyavadyaty. etad u iparitam.l sarvani dravani srunmukhena juhoti."fter having divided [both] together, adh-varyu priest deals] with both the milked. after having dividing out [a prortion] of dachi, he di-vides [ portion] of srtc. this [happens] alternatively in the opposite order. he offers all theliquids through the ladle's beak." Following texts show that both kinds of milk are kept separat-eduntil the oblation: baudhsrsu12,madhvatch purodus asudarati daksinatah srcmiarato ddi dhvaryu] places two purodusas on the middle [of the vedi], the srt on thesouth, and the dadhion the north";cf. apSrsui1,8-9〓)apsrsu vii1,9.16ag anvadhoua sakhom ahrtya vaisuadeva amiksaua vats apakaroti..16. purpapad yisvadevrh samdoham dohayati.〓after having supplied [ woods i the[three] fires [and] having brought the branch, [the adhvaryu] separates the calves [from theirmother cows for getting milk] for amiksa for all-Gods. in the same manner as the former (i.e.scmnaipa),[he] makes[the milker] milk the evening milk for [miks forall-Gods." cf. El-〓,die caturmaspa oder die altindischentertialopfer dargestellt mach deorschriften derbruhmanas d der srautasutrcs (Tokyo1988),pp.13f.8)baudhsrsu v1129,2-3.8-11:athotiaratas tirah pavitram y aniyamiksaya adhisrayati .tiruh panitram fapte pasi uclhy anayati. samiksa bhavati. tme ks c kusah parin-dhen sraparitd uipajinamkrtraprutape midudhati " then, having poured the milk across [over]the purification [branch northward, he puts [it]o [the sacred fire] for amiksa... when the
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSmilk is heated, he pours the dadhi into [it] across the purification [branch]. it becomes amiksa.whoever even skillful, having boiled it with surrounding firewood and made vajina separate.settles on the place where it is not yet heated", cf. apsrsuvi2,1.-6.9.we find inS1101,-11p～kSxxxv8,7-b6,, that ddhi and srta foma pair (mi-thund-) andamiksa comes from the pair. according to the MS and kS, what one can see throughqpari-dよ, -pas ) a liquid as something like an egg or mastu(sour cream?),is amiksa as an em-bryo.
9)e.g.〓srs,11;②SBi15;psrs vi5.3310)mSii,61dirghaihvi vai devinam pratahsavancm avulet. taid wyamadyat. spayasyabhauat. tcsmatpayasya vimadirupeva. " dirghajihvi, verily, licked off the gods' moringpressing (Soma juice pressed and offered in the morning).That she, intoxicated, vomited. it be-ame payasya. Therefore, payasya has just a vomitus' appearance." cf. abii22.11)kSxxix116,8p dirghaiihvi vai devanam yainam avaled pratassavanam. tud vyamadyar〓 payasyabhavat. tasmud amiksa vimaditeva. yo payasya pratassavane bhavati pratassava-nsya samyddhyai. " dirghajihvi, verily, licked off the gods' sacrifice, [that is,] morning pressing. that she, intoxicated, vomited. it became paysya. Therefore, amiksa is just like the vomited.That payasya appears (is used) in the morning pressing, [it] is for perfect equipment of themorning pressing."12)dtha yat purodish hanah karambho dhyamikseti bhdvati ya yainaisya deuatos tih supri〓 asmn iti.〓8〓 idm va apupam asitua kimayate.  dhanih khadeyam. karambham asmiyamdhyasmiyam. amiksomsiyam iti. te sarve kamo. ya yajnasya devdtas tah suprito asmm in.〓thayadesa pratahsapand eui maitravaruni payasyavak pta bhovati netarayoh svanaoh"Then, when purodus pancake), dhanas (parched barley or rice), karambha (dough of bar-ley), dudlhi, and amiksa, such is applied, [one intends ] that those who are deities of the sacrificeshould be content sufficiently.19.in this case, having eaten apupa (pancake), one wants: "iwant to chew (i.e. eat) dhanas, i want to eat karambha, i want to eat dadhi,i want to eat amik-sa." They are all desires. [it is intended] that those who are deities of sacrifice should be contenufficiently. then, [the feason] why this pqyasya for mitra-varuna is applied as [n offering]to be fit for the pratahsavana, [and] not in both other savanas (Madhyandinasavana "the noorSavana' and trtiyasavana the third, i.e. the evening Savana') [that]…(the explanation of thereason follows in section)"following sections 〓-22mention the five offerings: purodasa,dhana, karambha, dadthi, and payasyd. The texts which belong to the black Yv and the rvschool have payya alike in the same context as the Sb:MS1 purodcsa apupa,parivapa, dh., k., payasya, kSxXIxch., k., par., apupa, payasya; TSv5,11,pch., k.,par., purodasa, payasy,ab2,7djya, dh., k., par., purodsa, payasya,kbd., mh.saknu, purodcsa, payasya. on the offerings made of grain, cf. Einoo. "altindische getreidespei.sen"inchener studien sprachwissenschafft44,1985,pp.1-27).13)nishIMuRa, Grazing c(→n.3),pp.43f., 127-164,especially145ff. etc.14)payasya-as adj. occurs, however, only two times in the latyayana- and drahyayanasrsu. cf.
The  uapanese sSOciation ofIndian and buddhistStudiesPanini 〓v3,160gopayasor yat as for go- and payas-, the suffix y- [is applied]'vy-poyasya-. cf. e.g. candrd-for candrd- mas- bright moon (andnot the month).'15)cf. maAyroeR, epmologisches worterbuch des altindoarischenheidelberg,1992-1996)s.v. 〓ay', scaRlata, die wurzel kompositaimrg-ved(wiesbaden,1999),p.532.〓bbReviatio av: atharvaveda (Saunaka),avp: atharvaveda (paippalada),apsrsu:apastambha-srautasutra, ab aitareya-brahmana, kaps. kapisthala-katha-samnhita, kS. kathaka-Samnhita, kathsamkhku: kathakabrahmanasamkharana, kusmandabrahmana, katysrsu: katyaya-na-srautasutra, kb. kausitaki-brahmana, Gb: gopatha-brahmana, jb: jaiminiya-brahmana, taTaittiriva-aranyaka, tb: taittiniya-brahmana, tS: taittiriya-samnhita, bharss: bharadvaia-srauta-sutra, baudhsrsu: baudhayana-srautasutra, manss. manava-srautasutra, rv: rgveda, rv-kh:Rgveda (khila),vSk: vajasaneyi-samnhita (kanva),vSM: vajasaneyi-samnhita (madhyandina);Vadhsrsu: vadhula- srautasutra, vaikhss. vaikhanasa-srautasutra, sb/sbM: Satapatha-brahmank(Madhyandina), SBK: satapatha-brahmana (Kanva), hirsrsu: hiranyakesi-srautasutra(This research is supported in part by a grant-in-aid for young scientists (b) from jSPS)(key words) samnayya, amiksa, payasya, dadhi, vedic ritual, dairy product(researcher. tohoku university, phd.)
