The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiStStudieSSeveral affnities between the yuktidipiko and theSamkhyatattvakaumudi in the context of perceptionKondohavato
Introduction in the samkhyakarika (SK)of isvarakrsnac.ce),perception isdefined as "determination with reference to each [sense faculty's] respective object"(SK5a': prativisayadhyavasaya).presumably following an older theory, several commen.taries on the SK, such as the jinqishi lun金七十論,describe perception in terms ofa sensefaculty (indriya) that acts as an agent of determination.1/ however, as the SK23a attri-butes the function of "detemmination" to the intellect (buddhi), it follows that isvarakrsnaconsiders perception to be a function of the intellect. on the other hand, the anonymouscommentary yuktidipiko ca.68-720cE, Yd)explains the definition of perception inSK5a in consistency with this account of SK23a and vacaspatimisra's samkhyatattvd-kaumudi(c. cE, STK) has several striking similarities with the Ydin the samecontext. although these similarities have been partially discussed by nakai (1980)(1981:57ff.), kumar(198163ff.), Murakami (198228ff.) and others, i argue that they havenot been duly considered from the viewpoint of the relationship between the two commen-laries. to fill this research gap, i provide further clarification regarding these similaritiesand, on the basis of my analysis, I propose the possibility that the sTk not only followecthe views expounded in the Ydbut also critically accepted them1.Interpretations of the SK's definition of perception "prativisayodhyavasaya"The Yd and STK interpret the compound "prativisayadhyavsaya," which appears inthe defnition of perceptionin SK5ab' (prativisayadhyavasayo drstam) as follows.Ydad Sksab'[774-7]visayam visaym prati vartata iti "prativisayam." kim tat. indriyam. tasminy ' dhyovasoyah" s" prativisayodhyavasoyah." upattavisayanam indriyanam vgttyupanipati sattvodrekad arajiasta-masmyprakusarnpamtad dgstam.what is meant by the " prativisaya" is a thing which functions toward respective objects. what is it?
The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudieSlt is a sense faculty. the "determination" that is performed with regard to that [ sense faculty] ismeant by the " prativisoyadhyayasopya." following the function (transfiguration) of sense facultiesthat have received aobject, there arises a form ofillumination free from the raias and tamas byapredominance of the sattva, whichis " perception.STKad SKSab'「10.8-12visaym visayamprati variata iti prativisoyam" indriyam. vrttis ca sannikarsah. arthasannikystamindriyam ipy arthah. tasminn dhyavasoyah," tadasrita ity arthah. "adhyavasoyas"ca buddhivya-poro jnanam. upattavisayanam indriyanam vrttau sapyam, buddhes tamo ' bhibhane sati yah sattua-samudrekch o  'dhyavasaya" ii.what is meant by the " prafivisoyd" is a thing which functions toward respective objects i.e. a sensefaculty, and the function in this case is contact. [Therefore, "prativisoy"means a sense facultythat has made contact with a object. [〓prativisayodhyovasoy"] means "determination" towardthat [sense faculty that has made contact with an object] ie. ["determination"] rested on that.The "determination" is a function of the intellect and a particular form of knowledge. when thereis a function transfiguration) of the sense faculties that have received an obiect, and the tamas irthe intellect is overwhelmed, there arises a predominance of the sattva, which is the "determina.tion."
The yd and STK explain the meaning ofthe term "prati"i "prativisaya" as follows.ydad SKSab'1.9-12]pratigrahanam sannikarsartham. " visayadhyavasayo drstam" itiyaty ucyamane visayamatre sampratyayah syot. pratigrchane〓 punah kriyamane pratir dbhimukhye variate. tena samnikrstendri-yavrttynpamipoii yo 'dhyavasayas tad dystam"" ipyel labhyate.The term prat " is employed in order to signify contact. ifit were solely posited that "determina-tion toward objects is perception," any determinate notion of objects in general would be [regardedas perception]. however, when the term praf " is employed, the [term] "prat3' signifies confron-tation. Therefore, it is understood [from this definition of perception] that the detemmination, fol-lowing the function of sense faculties that have made contact [ with obiects], is " perception.'STKad SKsab'1.3-4]pratigrahanena cendriyarihasannikarsasucanad anumanasmypyadayas cparakyta bhavamti.Furthemmore, as the contact of a sense faculty with [its] objects is indicated by employing the temmiprati," the result is that inference, recollection, and so forth have been excluded [from percep-tion].
These passages explicitly indicate the existence of four significant affinities between theYd and the sTK. First, both interpret " prativisaya" as " visayam visaym prati vartate"and add the verb "vartate"" (to function). Second, both identify " prativisaya" as a senseaculty. third, both explain that perception occurs when the sattva is predominant andthe tamas becomes overwhelmed. Fourth, both assert that the temm "prati"in "prativisaya"
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesSeveral affinities between the yuktidipika and the samkhuatattuakaumudi in the context of perception (H. kondo)(5denotes "contact"(sannikarsa) with obiects. In addition to these four respects, there canbe foundasimilarity regarding the necessity of the term prati." The sTK explains that in-ference, recollection, and so forth are excluded from perception by the term "prati," whicrdenotes "contact." The Yd also expounds the necessity of the term " prati" through answer.ing the opponent's objection and it agrees with the sTk in that the term "prat"" is em-ployed in order to exclude inference, recollection and doubt from perception.〓 therefore,it may be concluded that the sTK's argumentation is a summary of the yd's argumenta-tion. Moreover, given the fact that the internal organs (antahkarana), such as the intellectcannot directly make contact with objects4/ a well as that the SK attributes perceptiontofunction of the intellect. both Yd's and STK's attribution of " prativisaya" to a sense facul-ty is consistent and reasonable.on the other hand, the Yd and the STK present different views regarding cognitions thatdo not require contact between sense faculties and objects. by interpreting "prativisaya-dhyavasapa" as a single remainder (ekasesa) compound, the Yd applies the definition ofperception to cognition concerning desire (raga) and so forth as well as yogic cognition.I〓contrast, the sTk excludes consideration of the yogic cognition from the context of per-eeption, thinking that the teaching of the Samkhya system is intended to instruct ordinarypeople only, despite admitting its existence in the commentary ad Sk4 the sTK, however, considers feelings such as pleasure (sukha) as fomms of cognizable objects for ordi-nary people,  and therefore, considers internal cognition concemning desire and so forthalso as a type of ordinary perception. From this standpoint, there is no appreciable differ-ence between the Yd and the STk. viewed in this light, it can be argued that vacaspati-misra were aware of the Yd's view that yogic cognition is a sort of perceptual knowledge,but critically addressed it within the context of pramang.2.interpretations ofthe term "adhyavasaya"" and s (prati)visaySeveral affinities between the Yd and the sTK regarding interpretations of the termiadhyavasaya" and " (prati ) visayd" can also be observed in the following passages.YDad Skb'[79.9-12…79.20-21.8.4-6]atiprasanganivrttyartham. "prativisayam dgstam" itiyaty ucyamane yavat kimcit prativisayamvartate 'nugrahakatvenopaghatakatvena va tat sarpam drstam ity etcd apadyate. adhyavasdyagrah-ane punah kripamane n doso bhavati. . tasmad adhyavasoyagrahanam kriyate sandeho ma bhud
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesii. . prativisayagrahanamasdvyudasartham. "adhyavasayo drstam" ityaty ucyamane mrgatrsnikalatacakragandharvanagaradisu yo 'dhyavasayas td drstam iti syot. prativisayagrahanat tu fesanvyuddsah krto bhavati.[Vormika:] inorder to avoid an over-application [to non-perception, the term "adhyayasaya""is employed ]. ifit were solely posited that "what stands toward objects is perception," it would fol-low that anything that stood toward objects, regardless of whether it were beneficial or detrimentalwould be perception. however, when the term "adhyavasoya" is employed, there is no fault of thatkind.. Therefore, the term "adhyavasopa" is employed in order to exclude doubtful knowledge.…the term prafivisoa" is employed in order to exclude nonexistent things. if it were solely p-ited that "determination is perception," determination toward a mirage, a circle of firebrand, a for-tress of gandharvas, and so forth would be perception. however, these[mirages and so forthhave been excluded [from perceptible objects] by employing the term " prativisaya."STKad Sksab' [0.24-11.4atradhyavasoyagrahanena samsayam vyayacchinatti. samsayasyanavasthitagrahanenaniscitaripatat. niscayo 'dhyavasoya iticanarthantaram. visayagrahanena casadvisayam viparyayam apakaro-ti.
In this [definition of perception], [the author] exchudes doubtful knowledge by employing the temmr"adhyavasoya." it is because doubtful knowledge has the form of the undecided in virtue of grasp-ing something as non-settled and because decision is synonymous with e determination." Further-more, [the author] excludes erroneous knowledge concerning nonexistent things [from perceptibleobjects] by employing the term" isaya."Regarding the meaning of the temm "adhyavasaya," both Yd and STK indicate that theerm is employed to exclude doubtful knowledge (sandeha/samsaya).on the other handit does not clear how the Yd considers nonexistent obiects to be excluded by the term" prativisaya," whereas the sTK explicitly stated that the term "visaya" is employed to ex-lude them.8 accordingly, the sTk appears to expand on the yd's interpretation ratherthan merely follow itin this regard.3.conclusion this study has identified and discussed several striking affinities betweenthe Yd and the sTK regarding their views and theories of perception, ) which do not ap-pear in other Samkhya texts. on the basis ofmy analysis, I surmise that the perception the-ory of the sTK is modeled on that of the yd to a considerable extent. however, i recog-nize that we must more carefully examine this surmise while taking other vacaspatimisra'stexts into consideration. in particular, we must examine the theory of reflection (prati-bimba) and the nature of the enjoyment (bhoga) of objects underlying the theory of per-ceptionin bothYd and sTk, topics that i plan to address in an upcoming paper.
The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiStStudiesSeveral affinities between the yuktidipika and the samkhwatattuakanmudiinthe contextof Perception. kondo)(57Notes
1)cf. iingishi l,No.2137)[1261-17],samkhyvrifi(.a. Solomon (ed.)Ahmedabad,1973)[9.24-101], Gaudapadabhasy. d. Sharma (ed.), poSno.9,poona1933)[7.6-7],〓atharavriti (v.p. Sharma (ed.),chSSno.296(work No.56),2d ed., varanasi1970)[9.15-16]ad Sk5ab'. This determination by a sense faculty has a close affinity with thetheory of perception in the varsaganya's sastitantra, prior to the Sk. See kumar(198163)andkondo h., "pramanasamuccayatiko dai 1 sho ni minu sastitantra chushakusho no chikaku-ronyuktidipiko to no kanren wo chushin ni," pramanasamuccayatika第1章に見るsastitamtra注釈書の知覚論-yuktidipikaとの関連を中心に-,indotetsugaku bukkyogaku kenkyインド哲学仏教学研究17(200)8.2)See chakravarti (1951172),kumar(1981:62) and nakai(198157-58).3)cf.ydad SK5ab" [81.13-82..See Murakami(1982196-99).4)cf. Yd ad SK30d[213].5)cf. Yd ad SK5ab'[226]. SeeChakravarti(1951172),kumar(1981:65) and Murakami(19822-3).6)cf. STKad Sk4ab' 9.-8]. See kumar (18166)and murakami(198225ff.).7)cf. STK adSKoab"[-7].8)See kumar(19816-66)and murakami (98220).9on the affinity regarding the instrument of cognition (pramana) and the result of cognition(pramana-phala), see nakai (1980)(1981:66ff.) and Murakami(1982:209).cf. Yd ad SK5ab[77.8-9]and sTKad SK5ab' [013-14]and ad SK4[21].Abbreviations and biblioqraphical ReferencesSk: samkhyakorika of isvarakrsna: see yd. STk: tattvakaumudi (ankhya), ed. g. jha, MumbaiTukaramatatya,1896.Yd. yuktidipika: the host significant commentryyo the samkhyakorikua,ed. a. wezler and s. motegi, vol. i, alt- und neu-indische studien, Stuttgart: franz steiner ver-lag,1998.
Chakravarti. pulinbihari.(1951).origin ad development of the samkhya systemof thoughr. cal-cutta: metropolitan printing and publishing house(2na ed., new delhi,1975).Kumar, Shiv.(1981)."nature of perception in Saminkhya-Yoga." sri venkates wara universipy ori-entl journal25-76.Murakami Shinkan.(1982).samkhya no tetsugaku: indo no nigenronサーンクヤの哲学-インドの二元論.sara-sosho27,kyoto: heirakuii-shoten.Nakai motohide.(1980)."Samkhya-ha ni okeru pramana-ron" samkhya派におけるpramana論.journalof indicn ad buddhisr studies 28-267-79.-.(981)."samkhya-haniokeru pramana-riron no juyokeitai"" samkhya派におけるprama-na理論の受容形態.ronshu. the Religious studies est and west no.853-79.(This research was supported in part by a grant-in-aid for jSPSFellows)(Key words) yuktidipika , samkhyatattuakaumudi, samkhya, pratyaksa, perception, pramana(Graduate student, The university of Tokyo, jSPSResearch Fellow c1)
