The  uapane Se sSOciationofIndian and buddhiststudies〓n manojalpain the mahoyanasutralamkoraMotoMuRa taiki1.IntroductionThe Yogacara Schoolis well known forits idealism. They assert that obiects in the oute1world arise fromlayaviinana or the mind and do not exist as real obiects. nevertheless.that does not mean that they are nihilists. in the mahayanasamgraha, it is said that obiectsin the outer world do not exist, but the mind that creates these obiects exists as real. how-ever, the earliest work of this school, the bodhisattvabhumi of the yogocarabhumi, assertsthe real existence of the outer world, that is, vastu (true existence) or tathata (true reali-ty).The " Tattvartha" chapter of the bodhisattvabhumi emphasizes that when vastu is theocus ofprajnapti (designation), the world appears as various things. however, when vs.uu is not the locus of prajnapti, the world appears as inexpressive. in other words, vastu hastwo aspects: one is the base of verbal designation, and the other is real existence as an in-expressive essence. in terms of what exists as real, this thought of the early YogacareSchool is completely different from the theory of dlayaviinana, which appears in the ma-hoyanasamgraha. it seems that the Yogacara School changed its thought from the theorof vastu, that is, the theory ofobject in the outer world, to the theory of dlayaviinana, thatis, the theory of mind as our inner world. although this fact is already well known, it hasnot been clarified how the Yogacara School transformed its thought. The concept of mano-japais key to finding an answer to this. in the mahayanasutralamkora, manoiapais stat-edin the context of spiritual practice, such as the cause of the manifestation of images dur-ing meditation. and in the mahayanasamgraha, manoialpa is mentioned as an importantconcept to connect spiritual practice and philosophical theoty.1 The present paper, there-fore, aims at clarifying how the Yogacara School transformed its thought through the in-vestigation of manojialpain the mahoyanasutralamkora.
The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiStStudieS2.vstu (true existence) andprajnapti (designation) in the bodhisattyabhumiln the " Tattvartha," chapter of the bodhisatrvabhumi, the real existence of vcstu otathata is presented as an inexpressive essence. in the first part of this chapter, tattva(truth) is categorized by two and four ways. in one of these categories, it is stated that bo-dhisatpas and the buddha-bhagovans recognize that all dharmas have the inexpressive es-sential nature (nirabhilapyasvabhovata).what is [ the truth, that is, the domain of knowledge completely purified of obscurations to the ob.ject (ineyovaranavisuddhiinanatatta)]? This domain (gocora-visaya), for bodhisattvas and thebuddtha-bhagavans, is to enter into the selflessness of dharma (dharmanairatmya). This isachieved through knowledge after having gained [enlightenment] and being purified. it begins withobtaining the inexpressive essential nature (nirabhilapyasvabhavata) of all dtharmas and theknowledge corresponding to the perception of the object without any verbal designation (projnapti-vadusvabhava). This is true reality, there being nothing higher, the extreme limit of knowables,[and] from which correct analyses of all dharmas are accomplished and are not necessary to sur-pass.
after this statement, tathata is regarded as vastu, and the relationship between vastu andprajnaptivadais described as follows.The one who denies (apavadamana) vsu that is mimitta as the foundation for verbal designationdestructs [everything, saying] that nothing does exjst in all respects. The vastu is mimitta, the basislor verbal designation, and exists as an absolute reality (paramarthasadbhita) of its inexpressibleature (nirabhilapyatmaka).3)From this statement, it can be understood that vastu is the locus of prainaptivada andprajnaptivada itself exists on vastu, furthermore, vastu exists as an absolute reality.3.manoiapa mental verbalization) in the context ofyoglnthe "dharmaparyesti ," the eleventh chapter ofthe mahoyanasutralamkara, mamojalpois mentioned in the context of yoga, i.e., spiritual practice.Through the error of perceiving the [imnage of] skeletonin mind, duality is mentioned. as such, de-spite the fact that there is no duality, duality is perceived [as perceiving the image of skeleton inmind]. (MSax
Through the yoga stabilizing intheir own realm svadhutu), [conceptualizations (vikulpah) ]attainthe special object (dlambanavisesa). They (conceptualizations) do appear as non-duality. it is like
The  uapaneSe sSOciationofndian and buddhiStStudieSskin (carma) and bone (kanda). (MSaxIn this verse, it is stated that conceptualizations attain the special object (alambanavise-sa). vasubandhu comments that the special obiect refers to an obiect as dharm (dharmalambana). The meaning of dharmalambanais explained in verse5.dharma is regarded as object: the intemal, the extemnal, and the both. Further, duality is obtained aslon-duality)because duality is not apprehended. (MSaX.)7According to the comment of Vasubandhu,8) "the intemnal" means subject (grahaka),"the extemnal" means object (grahya), and "the both" refers to true reality (tathata) as theinternal and the external get together (samasta). Therefore, "the special object" refers tohese three: the intemal, the extemnal, and the both. These are perceived as dharma in themeditation of yoga. further, in verses oand7,manoialpais mentioned:obiect as dharma is perceived by the three wisdoms [ arising from] hearing (sruta) [reflectior(cinta), practice (bhavana)], [that is to say, J by keeping clarity of the stated object (yathok-tarthaprasanna) [in mind] using mental verbalizations (manoiapa),by verbalization alpa) ofobjective appearance, and by fixing the mind upon the name (naman).and perception of threefoldobject which is previously mentioned is based uponit (dharma which is perceived by the three wis-doms).(MSax.6-7)9vasubandhu comments on this verse as follows:Moreover, dharma is perceived by the three wisdoms arising from hearing (sruta) reflection -ta), practice (bhavana ).In these, it (object as dharma) is perceived by the wisdom arising fromhearing, when one keeps clarity of stated object [in his mind」 using mental verbalizations. "usingmental verbalizations"" means "using correct conceptualizations (amkaipa).""clarity" (prasanna)means "tconvinced"(adhimukta) or "determined"" (niscita)."keep"(pradharana) means investi-gation" (pravicaya)It (obiect as dharma) is perceived by the wisdom stemming from reflection, when one keeps theppearance of the object [which appears] from verbalization. when one considers that the objectappears solely from mental verbalization, one realizes that there is nothing other than mental ver-balization in the cognition ofthe two stated objectsIt should be understood that it (object as dharma) is perceived by the wisdom arising from prac-tice, when one fixes his mind upon the name (numan), since there is no perception of duality in theognition of two stated objects. therefore, three objects which have been already explained arebased upon the perceiving object as dharma.According to vasubandhu's comments, especially those that were underlined, the onewho practices meditation maintains clarity on the stated object in mind. itis also explained
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS〓
that "clarity" (prasamna) means "convinced" (adhimukta) or "determined" (niscita).Inother words, the yogin keeps the convinced or detemmined objectin his mind.To understand the meaning of "convinced or determined object," the passage found inthe "Tattvartha"" chapter contains some useful information.[n these [ four tnuths, the first is as follows]; every people shares identical opinion through theknowledge which is laid (in mind) by following acquaintance with [linguistic ] sins (samketa)and conventions (smvrti)11with respect to vastu. for example, with respect to earth (prihivi),"earth is iust earth, and not fire"…in short, "This is this, and not that" or "This is such, and notany other." vastu is domainocara) of determined confidence (niscitadhimukrigocara), and isaccomplished by self-conceptualization svavikalpaprasidda) through the name (samina) whichis inherited by the people, without having been pondered, without having been weighed, and with-out having been investigated. this is the tnuth which is accomplished by the people.1This phrase states that a linguistic signsmketa) as worldly consent is given on vastuand people get linguistic consensus through it, such as " this is a book, not a pen." This"linguistic consensus" implies "determined confidence" (niscitadhimukti )19) it seems thatdetermined confidence or linguistic consensus appears from a linguistic sign samketa) onvastu. considering this statement in"tattvartha" chapter, the meaning of the statemenfound in vasubandhu's comments on verses 6and7, especially those that were underlined,can be made clear as follows, one takes outer-obiect in the mind converting it to a name o1word in the stage of hearing (sruta). This name or word in mind is called mental verbal-ization manoialpa).In the next stage, reflection cinta), the yogin manifests the imagefrom this mental verbalization and he considers that that obiect appears solely from mentalverbalization. and realizes that there is nothing other than mental verbalization. after goingthrough these stages, in the stage of practice (bhavana), the yogin fixes his mind upon thename, that is, mental verbalization, and perceives true reality tathata) extinguishing theduality of obiect. as such, we can say that manojalpa is an important concept in the con-text of yoga: it (ie., manojalpa) is the outer-object itself converted to a name or word irthe mind and is the cause of the manifestation of images during meditation.4.julpamotra verbalization itself) and cittamutra (minditself)when he (bodhisattva) recognizes obiects as verbalizations and dwells in the mind itself which re-semnbles them (objects), [he] reaches direct perception of the ultimate realmharmadhofu), freerom the characteristics of duality. (MSa(l)vi.7)
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesReaching the supreme realization that there is nothing apart from the mind, he comes to understandthat the mind has no existence. reaching [the supreme realization that] duality has no existence,genius dwells in the ultimate realm which has no circumstance [of cycle of reincamnation]. (MSa(l) vi.8)15)
These verses remind us of the theories of abhutaparikalpa and ulayavijnana. it shoulcbe noted that, in these verses, obiects themselves are verbalizations. considering this state.ment, it is likely that the theories of abhutaparikalpa and dlayavijnana were originallyused in a linguistic context. as we have already seen, the yogin manifests the images frommanoialpa during meditation: the image, originally, is a name used as a linguistic sign ofthe outer-obiect. in other words, the yogin first takes the outer-object converting it to aname in his mind. after that, the yogin manifests the image from the name in his mind, thatis, manoialpa. hence, we can say that this theory of manoiapa in the context of yoga de-veloped into the theories of abhutaparikalpa and dlayaviinana.5.conclusion
From the above investigation, we can arrive at the following conclusions: in the bo-dhisattvabhumi. it is stated that the existence of vastu is an inexpressive essence in the out-er world. when vastu is the locus of designation, that is, prajnapti, the world appears asvarious things. however, when vastu is not the locus of designation, the world appears asinexpressive. The former is what we call mundane, and the latter is what we call supra-mundane. an investigationon the concept of manoialpa in the mahoyanasutralamkora re-veals that manojolpa is outer-object which is converted to the name or word in mind. inother words, it is a designationon vastu, which is stated in the bodhisattvabhumi. First, theyogin takes the designation .e., prajnapti) on outer-object (i.e., vastu) into his mind, af-ter that, he manifests the images from manoialpa during meditation. it seems that this the-ory of the manifestation from manotialpa developed into the theories of abhutaparikapaand dlayaviinana. and the same time, manoialpa itself becomes a important concept tcconnect spiritual practice and philosophical theory in the hahoyanasamgraha.Notes.
1)about the concept of manojalpain the mahoyanasamgraha, see watanabe [20].2)bbh2:tat punah katamat/ bodhisattvanam buddhanam bhagavatom dharmanairat-myapravesaya pravistena suvisuddhena c sarvadharmanam mirabhilapyasvabhavatam arabhy
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesprajnapfivadusvabhayanirvikalpasamena jnanena yo gocaravisayah/ su parama tathataniruttara jneyaparyantagatd ysyah samyaksarvadharmapravicaya nivartante mativartanteff3)bbh5.3.1 ys capi prainaptivadanimittadhisthanm prainaptivadanimittasammisraynnirabhilapyatmakataya paramarthasadbhitam vt apavadn nasayati sarvena sarvam mastitif4)bimbasamkatikagrahabhranter vayam udahrtam/〓ayam tatra yatha nasti dvayamcaivopalabhyate// (MSaXi.26)5)dlambanavisesaptih svadhatusthamayogatah,t evhy advayabhasa vartamte carmakondayatl (MSaXi.33)6)MSa reads "labho dapor dvayarthena." i read elabho dvayudvayarthena." See mSaa〓ob6.(b53a8.
7)dlambanam mato dharmah adhyatmam buhyakam dvayam/labho dvavudvayarthena* dvayos canupalambhatahff MSaXi.5)8)MSabhon MSax dharmalambanm vo desitah koyadikam cudhvatmikam buhvam d.hvdtmikabahyac tatra gruhakabhutam koyadikam ddhyatmikam grahyabhutam bahyam y-〓*eva tathatadvayam/ tatr duayor ddhyatmikabahyayor alambanayor dvayorthena labhcyathokramam yadi grahyarthad gruhakortham abhinnam pasyati grahakorthoc ca grahyariham〓oy punah samastasyudhyatmikabahyolambanasya tathatapya labhas tayor eva hayor an-palambhad veditavah(*1corrected by msa(l,p.55.15)9)manoialpair yathokturthaprasannasya pradharanatarthakhyanasva jalpac c nammi sthanac c cetasahfdharmalambanalabhah sut tribhir inanaih srutudibhihripidhalambanalabhas ca purvoktas tatsamasritahMSAx.6-7)10)MSabh on MSax.6-7: dharmalambanalabhh punar tribhir jnanair bhavati srutacintab.havanamayaih/ tutra samahitena cetusa manoiulpair yathoktarthaprasannasya fatpradharanutsrutamavena nanena tallabhah/ manoialpair iti samkalpaih/ prasamnasveny adhimukiasva misci-〓sa/ pradharanad in pravicayat jalpud arthakhyanasy pradharanoc cintamayena tallabhah/yadti manoialpud evoyam arthah khyutiti pasyati nanyan manojalpad yathoktam dvavulambanal-dbhe/ cittasya namni sthanat bhovanamayena jnanena tullabho veditavvo dvayanupalambhadwatokutam dvayalambanalabhe/ ata evc purvoktas trividhalambanalabho dharmalamba-nalubhasammisrito viditavpah/11)about the understanding of this compound esamketasamvrtisamstava" and the meaning of"smstava," see takahashi [1-152,n.3].12)bbh2.2.1: tatra laukikanom sarvesvsmim vastumi samketasamvrtisamstavanugamapravistaya buddhya darsanatulyata bhavati/ td yatha prthivyam prtivy eveyam nagmir itif… s.masata idm idm nedm evm idm onyateti niscitadhimuktigocaro yd vastu sarueym elaukikonam paramparagutaya samjnaya svavikalpaprasiddham  cintayitva tulayitvopa-pariksyodgrhitam idm ucyate lokaprasiddham tattvami13)about the meaning of "adhimukti," see takahashi [205:152,n.4
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS14)arthons viinay ca jalpamatran smtisthate tamnibhacittamatrepratyaksatam etica dharmadhotus tasmad viyukio dvayalaksanena MSa)v.7)15)nastiti cittut parametya buddhya cittasya nastitvam upaiti tasmat〓ayasy nostitvam mpepyo dhma samtisthate tadgatidharmadhatau sa()v.8abbreviations and bibliography:Bbh: bodhisattvabhumi. takahashi [20583-117].MSa ahayamasutralamkarakorika) : See MSabhMSa(a),(b)see takeuchi etc.MSabh mahayanasutralamkar-hasyasee Funahashi [35-69].MSA(ahayanasutrolamkara-karika)evi [183.Funahashi, naoya [200]"aijoshogonkyoron no shomondai narabini dai11Sho Guho-bon noTekisuto kotei (Some Problems in the mahayanasutralamkara and comigenda of the mahayanasu-tralamkara chapter X))," the annual Report ofResearches of otani universipy521-69[InJapanese].
levi, Sylvain[1983](ed.) mahayanasutralamkara: expose dedoctrine du grand vehicule.Tome i, kyoto: Rinsen book co. (First edition paris.1907)Takahashi, koichi [20;bosatsuii shiniitsugi-bon kara shokecchaku-bun-chu-bosatsuii enoShisotenkai (philosophicl development from the bodhisattvabhumi to the bodhisattvabhumivinis-caya), bibliotheca indologica et buddhologica12, tokyo: the sankibo press [n japanese].Takeuchi, Shoko, mikogami, esho, hayashima, osamu, shimizu, koyo, mori, toshihide, fuiita,Yoshimichi ; and noriyama, Satoru[1995]:(eds. and introduced) sanskrit mamuscripts of the ha-hoyanasutralamkora fromnepal, Facsimile series of pare texts in the library of Ryukoku univer-sity1, kyoto: ozokan Japanese].watanabe, chikafumi [2 "manojalpa in hoyanasamgraha iii," builetin of the School ofliterature, aris ad cultural studies kinki universipy1-1[In japanese].(Key words> manojialpa, vastu, prajnapti, mahoyanasutralamkara, bodhisattvabhumi(Postdoctoral Research Fellow, nagoya university, ph.d.
