The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSThe image of Rgvedic Sarasvati: RVvii95,96YaMada tomokilt is assumed that sarasvati- literally means possessing pond(s)/lake (s) sdras-).'opers.Harauvatis and yav. harax"'a'ti-, the iranian name of arachosia (the kandahar area today),go back to the same origin. The sarasvati river is identified with modern-day ghaggar-Hakra river, Ghaggar is the indian name, hakra Pakistani. This river flows from the indianstates of haryana and Rajasthan to pakistan. o some areas, this river still occasionallydoods in rainy season,1' but most parts of middle and lower reaches have already dried up.Many remains of indus age are, as is well known, excavated along its pastriver bed.The Rgveda (RV)contains three sarasvati hymns: vi6,)v95and 96.The lattertwo are dedicated to the male counterpart Sarasvant together with Sarasvati. This papeldeals with these two suktas, and aims to get the image of Srasvati in the RV.RVv95(611)
1. pra ksodasa dhayasa ssra esraswati dhariinam dyasi pih prabdbadhana rath yeva vativisua apo mahina sindhur anhcefsraswati nadinam scir yati giribhyad samudritroycis cetanti bhivanasya bhirer ghrtam poyo duduhe mahusay.s vavrdhe noryyosanosu〓 sisur vrsabho yajniysu vajinam maghovadbhyo dadhati vi staye tsvam mamsi〓t sya nah sairasvati jusano sravat subhoga yaine asinmitojnubhir nams yoir iyanaoyuyuio cid uittara skhibhyh5.ima juhvana ynsmcd a mamobhiprati stomam sarasvati jusasvrova sarm pripdtame dddhana  upa stheyama saranaim n vyksaycu fe sarasvati vd-sistho daroy ytsya subhagevyo varcha subhre sturate rasi voicnyuy pata syastibhilsdc h
1.She has flowed forward4 with a splash and nourishment. Sarasvati is a base, an irorfort. The large river (Sindhu) goes, just like with a charioteer, pushing out every other wa.ters on andon with the greatness. 2. Sarasvati stands out ' as the only one among therivers, being shiny, going from mountains till the ocean. being familiar with" many wealtlof the world (being), she has milked butter oil, [and] milk8 for the descendant of Nahus.
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS3.he (Sarasvant) grew up as a manly one among the girls, as a seed bull, a child bullgrew up] among [the girls ] suitable for rituals. he settles a winning horse") for peoplehaving capacity. may he wipe his body clean to win.4.And Sarasvati in the concernshall listen to us, enjoying [our words ], as the fortunate (having a good distribution) one,in this ritual. Moving on with the worshippers having firm knees,1) she is superior to hercolleagues because of connection with wealth, at all.5. [Getting] these [things]1)fronyou (rivers) [and] offering with respects,-osarasvati, enjoy (accept willingly) [this]hantl -settling ourselves under your most preferable patronage, we want to stand under atree just like/asa shelter.6. hHere, o sarasvati, vasistha has [just] opened the doors ofhe truth (cosmic order), o fortunate one. [so] grow up, obeautiful woman, bestow priz-〓 on the praising personl [refrain:] You (pl.) defend us always with well-beings.Stanza1,2image of Sarasvati as a river: the poet praises Sarasvati as the best rive1which fows from mountainous regions into ocean, and describes her strong current as arunning chariot.14)2,4,6Giver of affuence: in many passages, Sarasvati is concemed to the words whichdenote something affluent: e.g. rayi- "wealth,, 15)vijia- prize, 16) vasu- "good.217)it seemreasonable to suppose that she had been regarded as a goddess who brings afluence, theNord subhdga-(8) is one of the characteristic qualifications of Sarasvati which sym-bolizes such aspect. This image would be based on a natural phenomenon that a riveibrings fertility.19):Giver of milk: Sarasvati is frequently described as a cow.0 it is also assumed that thiimage is based on the fact that rivers, which provide water and grass, had been decisivelyimportant to breed cattle. also other rivers are described as cattle in some passages, vi36,〓d yot sakamyasaiso vavasanihsrasvati saptdthi sindhumata yh susvdyanta suduighahsudharalabhi svena poyasa pipyahwhen renowned [sindhus (rivers)][come] hereall together, bleating each other,-(and) Sarasvati whose mother is sindhuas the sev-enth, -as they are fertile, well-milking, having good streams, swelling up with their owrmilk..'
3:Sarasvant: 'he' denotes sarasvant, and 〓girls' waters (dpas) or rivers. Sarasvant appears also ini164,52,vi94-6,X66,5.as HiLlebRant (vedische Mythologie i,p.357ff.) supposes, Sarasvant is similar to apam napat (and Soma) : both are interpreted
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesasan "eagle (suparnd-)"or are surrounded by girls (waters)164,5divym suparnamvayasm brhomtam qpim ghdrbham darsatom osadhinm bhipato vrstibhis torpdyan.〓msrasvantam vase johavimiirepeatedly call for Sarasvant for help, who is theleavenly eagle, the high kind of bird (sun?), the good-looking embryo of waters [and]plants, satisfying by rainfalls in the waterside.' The description 'a young man among girlswaters) 'occurs several times about apam Napat (〓35,x30).22RVvI96(612)
1.byhodu goyise vcosrya nainrasvatim in mahoya surktibhis stomair vasistha ro-di.ubhe yot te mahind subhre dndhasi adhiksiyanti purohno boh,yavitri maruitsakhacoda radho maghonbhadram id bhadra krnavat sarasvtykavari cetati vajimivatil grnandjamodogmivcit suvanac asisthacitjamiyanto n agravc  putripycntah suddnavchrcs-vantam havamahe 〓5.ye te sarasvaurmdyo' mddhumamto ghriascuchbhirno'pita bha6.jpinimsam sdrasvat stanamyo visvddarsath bhaksimchi prajim im1.I sing, sinany case, a high word: [She is] asurish amongrivers. glorify just Sarasvatiwith good admirations, and glorify] heaven and earth, with chants, o vasisthal 2. withyour greatness, o beautiful woman, purus dwell in [the place of] both andhas,4s youhaving maruts as followers, become our guardianl drive/urge the generosity of peoplehaving capacityfofthe well-to-do ones. 3. promising goodlucks Sarasvati shall make eventhe good luck. [She] who never looks dowon the tribe's member,) who has the winnigpower, stands out, as she is welcomed like jamadagni, praised like vasistha.4. Seekingfor a wife, now, being unmarried,0 seeking for a son, we call Sarasvant with good dona-on.5osarasvant, what is your waves, which contain honey,8 dripping butter oilbecome our guardian with theml 6. we want to share with swelling breast, which is every.where good-looking, of Sarasvant in offspring [ and] nourishment.stanza1:The mistress of the rivers: the word asur,vd- suggests that sarasvati has thestatus of the "lord' (dsura-). sarasvati and asuras (Adityas without amnsa) are enumer-ated in one passage: i89, 3 〓n purvaya mivida humahe vaycmbhdgam mitraim dditimdaksamasridhmryamanam vorunam somamasviarasvati nh subhdga mdyskarctThem we call by the first nivid (appointing sentence): bhaga, Mitra, aditi, neverfailing daksa, aryaman, varuna, Soma, both asvins. Sarasvati, having a good distrbution,should provide refreshment for us!'
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies〓:Sarasvati and maruts: Sarasvati frequently appears with maruts.0maruts symbolizenot only a thunderstorm or heavy rain of monsoon season, but sometimes also "the light ofspring' which concemns with the plundering raid performed by aryans before a rainy sea-son. The relationship between them can be explained by "the rising of water level be-cause of rainfall.'3:voimiyafi- 'woman equipped with winning powers": Sarasvatiis often called vaiimiva-〓i- this is derived from viia- m. chariot race, victory, prize, trophy of war, etc. (cfEWaia).'oldenbErg(kl.schr., pp.21-25)suggests that this polyseme originally means"the power to dash possessed by racehorses, the power demonstrated at chariot races.' The-〓- stem vajin-  characterized with viia-" is used in the meaning of powerful, hero, racehorse' (cf. Ewaia). The feminine vajini- appears as adj. of usas(〓61,1)or arasvati(v61,6).vojiinivant- (f. vajimivati-) appears seventeen times in the Rv, and in most casesin the feminine, similary mainly of usas and Sarasvati.3) in addition, vajimivant- (f. vd.inivati-) tends to occur with the words concerned to the chariot races, e.g. ratha- 〓chariot,sva- "horse,' vdjia- race, prize,' royi- wealth.' doyaa diss., p.168) assumes two mean-ings for this word: 〓having winning horses (vajin-)'or "bringing a prize (vijia-),' althoughitis difficult to distinguish these two in each passage. however, the basic concept seemstcbe sought in 'having the power to win (chariot races).' Thus it is assumed that Sarasvathad been regarded as a goddess of victory4-6:trca for sarasvant: the poet invokes sarasvant to bring a descendant, and describeshim as having the "sweet [or intoxicating] and butter oil dripping wave." asimilar "wave""appears inx,8(apam napat hymn) or x64,9, but in these passages, the owners of thewave are Sarasvati or other rivers. in the last stanza, the topic is a breast of SarasvantSimilarly, the breast of Sarasvati is referred to ini164,49: ydis te stanah ssayo yo may-obhir yena visva puisyasi varyi yo ratnadhi vsuvid yh suddtrahsrasvati tom ihddhdtave khwhat is your continuously existing breast, which is refreshing, with whichyou prosper in all the chosen/precious things, which is created of the treasure, goods-find-er, which has good donations, o sarasvati, that [breast] you should make here to suckle.'lt needs further to be investigated the accurate relationship between Sarasvant, Sarasvati,apam napat, and the waters opoh) in general.1)cf. aek "The decline of indus civilization and environmental changes," Environmental
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studieschange and the indus civilization. Report 007,Research institute for humanity and Nature,2008(rIHN08),35ff.2)on this sukta, cf. yaastudy of the sarasvati hymn of the RvvI61,"RH8,"rgveda vi The Sarasvati hymn," jibs57-2,2009.3)edd. ekocetat.4)That is. "sarasvati is now flowing.' cf. kUmMEL das erfekt im indoarischen,200,p.5515)interpreted as a "general" imj. Following the Pp. (eka aceta)Sarasvati stood out (ipf.) asthe sole one.' it may also be: "sarasvati has an understanding.' cf. Goro die "i. prasensklasse"im vedischen.1987,p.138,140.6)or. from the mountains, from the ocean. witzl assumes that samudrd- "the place where wa-ter joins' means "terminal lake, join ofrivers' or a mythic river at the end of the earth, the ocearin heaven.' cf. Rig-veda. das heilige wissen, ed. witzl-Goto,27(w-G),p.844.klaus assumes that it means a wide river formed from ioin of rivers, i.e. indus or ganges,' cf. "samudraim veda," zdMG Suppl. vi,1989,p.34ff., die wasserfahrzeuge im vedischen indien,1989,p.26.
7)literally 'being aware of, understanding,' cf. goto i. pras., p.140.8)cf. kUMMEl perfekt, p.249.'butteroil [d] milk' is the contents acc. (Inhaltsakkusativ).9)Refeming to lasSEN and b1,13,geldnR(, p.265)suggests that the eastern part ofIndus may be a growing area of horses.10)The function of (perf.) opt. is "the speaker's will (cupitive)." kumMel(perfekt, p.373)in.terprets as the reflexive, and gldneR mention in the footnote : "sarasvat den Leib des ren-npferdes in seinen Fluten.' it may be intempreted that sarasvant itself is described as a winninghorse.
11)-inu- is a weak form of ranu- "knee", scarlata, wurzelkomposita imrgveda,1999,p.34tpeople walking with steady steps or standing up straight.'12)geLdnER supplies a offering, and GRassMann worterbuch zum rigveda, sp.1671(s.v. hu)ea hymn (gir-).13)generally, iva and nd are translated as just like,' however in many passages, it means also "as.cf. Goto w-G,p.692.14)For another example, see vl61,13.cf. Yaa study ofthe Sarasvati hymnof the rvv61,"RHN008,p.123.15)54.13.v35.11.V.3.vi,4x17,9.x30,12.16)this word is taken up later.7)I3,10,i164,49,ii1,11,vii21,17.18)this term is used for sarasvati ini89,and vi21,17too.19)cf. GeldNer ibid.20)I164,49,Vii36,6,vi61,14,Vl96,5,〓X67,32,X64,9.21)it may denote that Sarasvati had been regarded as a branch of Sindhu, or sindhu as the best
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieS〓
22)〓apam napat hymns, cf. goto "a material rv, apam napat the grandson of watershymn," The Myths of water and Fire: fire in the water, Ed. chiwaki shnnoda,2010,p.426.23)oninfinitives in-se, see sGll die infinitiv im rgveda,1958,p.182,goo ld-indo-aryanMorphology and its indo-iranian background,p.134.24)dndhas- stemroot of soma.' GldneR suppose that the dual andhas' mean 'soma and sura(fommeris the beverage for gods and latter is for people)'or "soma and milk.' itcan be also in-terpreted as both darknesses, ie. darkness and lightnight and day.'25)dkavari- appears two times in the rv. on kava- and kavari- 〓crushing enemies' cf. hofpmanNAufsatze.p.41ff., and ari- "belonging to the friendly/hostile tribe' cf. goto w-g,p.828.26)cf. MayrhoeR Etymologisches worterbuch des altindoarischen waia)i,1992,p.719f. itis supposed that this word originally means "not being pregnant.'27)In many passages, diu- means "rain,' therefore it gives two meanings: 〓dripping liquid' orgift.
28)madhu-can be interpreted as soma.29)cf. goto w-G. p.828.in yav, there is a passage in which waters are called ahurani "mistress-es.' cf. narTen der Yasna haptanhaiti,1986,p.212ff., goto 〓vasistha und varuna inrvvi88priesteramt des vasistha und Suche nach seinem indoiranischen hintergrund-," Indo-arisch, iranisch und die indogermanistik, 2000,p.16030)〓3.8.ii54,13,v46,2,vi9,5,v39,5,vii,〓X8,4, x65,1,and here. above all, i30.8andii5413tell their brave aspect.31)cf. Goto w-G. p.838.32)I3,10,i,18,vi6,3and4,vii96,3.33)other examples are referred to sindhu, asvins, etc. above all, asvins are sometimes calledvaiimivasu-. pw and GrassManN give the same meaning as vojimivant-. this wordis mainly usedfor asvins, and in some passages this is also connected with chariot races. the image of asvinsto lead the chariot may be assumed(Key words) sorasvati-, sarasvati, rgveda, rv, river, sindhui-, sindhu, sdrasvamt-, sarasvant.Marut, apam napat, vojimivati-(Graduate student, tohoku university)
