The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudiesanew viewpoint on the Sautrantika Schoolof buddhistPhilosophy based ona study of Sarvastivadin Schoolin gandhara[SHida kazuhiro1.Introductionwe have yet to fully understand the substance ofthe Sautrantika school of buddhist phi-losophy. here l will propose anew point of view in this essay to better understand the sau-trantika school of thought. it is my contention that the Sautrantika school has some relationto the sarvastivadin school in the Gandhara area. This idea is a new point of view in theunderstanding of Sautrantika and the various theories concerning it. Generally speakingthe Sautrantika considered the sutras to be the most important in the tripitaka, whichmeans that they made sure their theories had no inconsistencies with the sutras. Since thistendency is also seen in the Sarvastivadin school i Gandhara, likely there is some relation-ship between the two. in order to substantiate this relationship, i will present two instancesof evidence from the abhidharmakosabhasbh).2.The definition of the sautrantika School and the characteristics of theSarvastivadin SchoolinGandharaThe meaning of Sautrantika as definedby Yasomitra in the abhidharmakosavyakhAkv)is as follows. "what is the Sautrantika? The sautrantika are those who depend orthe sutras, and do not depend on the sastras."l/ possibly the origin ofthis definition comesfrom a passage in the akbh."we are those who depend on the sutras, but do not dependon the sastras.There is yet another sinilar passage in the akbh"Even if not consistentwith the sastras, it still must be consistent with the sutras.This last passage is describingthe characteristics of the Sarvastivadin schoolin Gandhara.In the akbh, the two passages are very similar. For this reason, i suggest there must besome relationship between the sautrantika school and the sarvastivadin school of Gand-hara. likely, the Sautrantika school is a sub-group within the sarvastivadin school i
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSGandhara. hence there is a resemblance between the definition of the Sautrantika schooland the description of the characteristics of the sarvastivadin schoolinGandhara.3.what is the sarvastivadin Schoolof Gandhara?Before i argue the relationship between the Sautrantika school and the Sarvastivadinschool of Gandhara. i must discuss the defnition of the sarvastivadin school of GandharaThe sarvastivadin schoolin Gandhara is definedin some texts as identical to the Pascattya.the " buddhist scholars of the westermn region" (xifangzhushi西方諸師or xifangshamen西方沙門).according to some commentaries on the awritten by puguang普光,Fabao法宝,and Yasomitra), the Pascattya are the scholars of the Sarvastivada school inGandhara, which is located in westem kasmira. based on these commentaries, we mightaccept that the Pascattya group is the same as the sarvastivadin school of Gandhara. Thefirst appearance of the term xifangzhushi occurs in the mahovibhas apiposhalun大毘婆沙論=i, and the first appearance of the term pascattya occurs in the akbh. Fromthe original akh text cited above and these two chinese versions ( translated by Xuan.zang玄奘and Paramartha真諦),we can understand that "Xifangzhushi" corresponds to"pascattya." however, the sarvastivadin school of Gandhara is distinct from the Sarvasti-vadin school of kasmira, so next i would like to consider the relation between thePascattya group of scholars and the sarvastivadin school of kasmira.4.The controversy concerning samksipta-cita(略心)In order to clarify the characteristics of the pascattya group, i will now examine the con-troversy about samksipta-citta that occurred between the pascattya group and the sarvasti-vadin school of kasmira. The Sarvastivadin school of kasmira defines samksipta-citta as"good mind" but the Pascattya group defne it as "a mind with a sleep."4)The differencebetween the two definitions arises from an inconsistency between the sutras and the sas-tras. The sarvastivadin school of kasmira chooses the defnition consistent with the sas-tras, whereas the pascattya group chooses the definition consistent with the sutras. ThePascattya group chides the Sarvastivadin school of kasmira with the phrase, " even if notconsistent with the sastras, it still must be consistent with the sutras." iconsider this pointto be the distinguishing difference between the pascattya group and the Sarvastivadinschool of kasmira, confirmed by these two different views regarding being inconsistent
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSAnew viewpoint on the sautrantika school of buddhist philosophy basedona study of sarvastivadin schoolin gandhara(k. ishida)(81with either the sutras or the sastras.According to a comment by Yasomitra, the import of the phrase above is that " the abid-harma treatises were not expounded by the buddha./This comment is commonly takerto be the defining principle of the sautrantika school in the akvy. In the controversy aboutsamksipt-citta, we can say that the pascattya group's attitude is the same as the Sautranti-ka school's.
5. differing defnitions of anusaya(随眠)between the Sautrantika and vaib-hasika SchoolsIn the akh there is another controversy with the same background as the controvers〓about samksipta-citta. This controversy is about the two different interpretations of anusa-ya between the Sautrantika and vaibhasika schools.The seven kinds of latent afflictions (anusaya) are introduced in the fifth chapter of the〓khausaya-nirdesa). kamaraganusaya(欲貪随眠),"craving-dormant," is one in-cluded among the seven. acontroversy arises between the Sautrantika and vaibhasikaschools concemning its meaning. The vaibhasika school understands anusaya as an "activeklesa" paryavasthana), whereas the Sautrantika school understands amusaya as a "latentklesa.
This difference of opinion between the two schools is due to whether they are followingthe sutras or the sastras. The vaibhasika school's understanding is consistent with the sas.tras, but not with the sutras. on the other hand, the Sautrantika school's understanding isconsistent with the sutras. but not with the sastras. Indeed, the akh suggests that the vai-bhasika school intenpretationkamaraga evamusayah) is inconsistent with sutras and theSautrantika school interpretation(kamaragosyanusayah) is inconsistent with the sastras.Both argue the other school is wrong due to inconsistency, the vaibhasika school being in-consistent with sutras and the sautrantika school being inconsistent with the sastras.6.The Resemblance between the Sautrantika School and the sarvastivadirSchoolof GandharaNow let's consider the two controversies about samksipta-citta and anusaya. The formercontroversy occurs between the Pascattya scholars and the sarvastivadin school of kasmi-ra. The latter controversy occurs between the Sautrantika and vaibhasika schools. a re-
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSsemblance can be found in these two controversies.first, the cause of these controversies is the inconsistencies between the sutras and thesastras. Second. the Sarvastivadin school of kasmira and the vaibhasika school elected tcbe inconsistent with the sutras. whereas, the pascattya scholars and the Sautrantika schooldid the opposite , they followed the sutras and refuted any theories inconsistent with thesutras. Hence, the Pascattya scholars and the Sautrantika school likely have the same back-ground. i consider this to be the most important point that distinguishes the sarvastivadinschool of Gandhara from the sarvastivadin school of KasmiraTherefore. we can assume that the Sautrantika school belongs to the Sarvastivadinschool of Gandhara. if the Sautrantika school does indeed belong to the Sarvastivadinschoolof Gandhara, then we can establish the origin of the sautrantika schoolin the periodwhen the Mvi was compiled. however. this does not necessarily mean that the name "sau-trantika"" already existed in this period, merely we can see a Sautrantika school inclinatiorin the Sarvastivadin school of Gandhara. The name " Sautrantika"" first appears in theakbh, and it cannot be found inabhidhamma literature before the akbh. That does notmean, however, that the essence of the Sautrantika school did not yet exist. because thereis a resemblance between the Sautrantika school and the sarvastivadin school of Gandhara.lthink that the essence of what would later be labeled the Sautrantika school already exist-ed before the akbh7.conclusion
Inthis essay, ihave proposed a relation between the Sautrantika school and the sarvasti-vadin school of Gandhara. considering the defnition of samksipta-citta, we can understancthat the sarvastivadin school of Gandhara regarded the sutras as being of primary impor-tance. similarly. the Sautrantika school likewise chose to follow the sutras when there wasan inconsistency between the sutras and sastras. This resemblance demonstrates some rela-tionship between the two. if the sautrantika school is a sub-group of the sarvastivadinschool, then they must belong to the gandhara school, rather than kasmira school.accepting my proposal presented here, it can logically be applied to some precedingstudies. it is not necessary to my argument that all theories of the sautrantika school arestrictly related solely to the Yogacara or darstantika schools of thought. The Yogacara anddarstantika schools of thought perhaps belong to the sarvastivadin school of Gandhara. it
The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSso, then the philosophy of the Sautrantika school bears some relation to both philosophies.whether the Sautrantika school was established during the period when the hvi was com-piled or during the period of the akbh, the sautrantika school nevertheless has some rela-tion to the sarvastivadin school of Gandhara. my proposal needs further verification, butthe resemblance between the Sautrantika school and the Sarvastivadin school of Gandharashould not be overlooked.1)akvyp.11,"kh sautrantika. ye sutra-pramamikoan sastra-pramanikuh. te sautrantika."2)akhp.146, "sutrapramanaka vayamna sostrapramanakoh," cf. kato, junsho, etude sue lessautrantika(経量部の研究),tokyo: shunjusha press, 1989,pp.87-88.3)akhp.397," varamsastravirodho n sutravirodhah." This passage agrees with the definitiorof Sautrantika by Yasomitra. cf. sakurabe, hajime, and odani, Nobuchiyo, and honio, yoshifumi,kusharon mo gentenkenkyn: chihon, johon(倶舎論の原典研究智品・定品),tokyo: daizo-shuppan press,〓00,p.4,n.43.4)akhp.396, "samksiptam middhasamprayukiam."5)akvy.621, "abuddhokbhidharma-sastram."Texts
Akhpradhan ed., abhidharmakosabhasva of vasubandhu, Patna,1967.MViapiposhalun大毘婆沙論:taisho vol.27,no.1545〓kVy.wogihara ed., Sphutartha abhidharmakosavyakhya, tokyo,1971<Key words) sautrantika, Sarvastivadin of Gandhara,(Research Fellow. Jodoshu research institute of buddhism)
