The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieScriticism of Entity Theory and the acceptance of alayavijnanc:The investigation of the Sautrantika for vasubandhuHoriuc Toshio1.IntroductionThe study of the sautrantika has recently made great advances, mainly because of thediscovery of a relationship between the abhidharmakosabhosykBh) and the yogacara-bhumi (Ybh).in this regard, some scholars argue that vasubandhu was already a Yogacarawhen he wrote the akbh. although it is true that from this point of view the study of theSautrantika is of great importance, i cannot agree with this opinion when one considers thefollowing two situations. First, Vasubandhu defines the Mahayana as a teaching that pos-sesses seven greatnesses(saptavidha-mahattva) in the vyakhyayukti (vyy),a text writ-ten after the akbhby the same author. These seven are, in short, summarized as the interpretation of dharma and buddha.  with regard to buddha, he declares that Sakyamuni is 〓manifestation. with regard to dharma, on the other hand. he emphasizes the ineffablenessof all dharmas. These are mahayana doctrines that he himself clearly articulates. Secondthe intenpretation of dharma on the basis of the tenets of the Mahayana, that is, the interpretation that all dharmas are ineffable, can be regarded as an innate yogacara doctrinebased on the description by sagaramegha. in his yogacarabhumivyakhya, sagarameghedescribes the position of Yogacara in the history of buddhist thought as follows. after theBuddha's nirvana, many of the buddhist sects adhered to the view of existence. Then, na-garjuna countered this by expounding the teaching of emptiness. however, some of hisfollowers misunderstood this teaching, adhered to emptiness, and fell into nihilism or theview of non-existence. Therefore, Maitreya /asanga taught the ybh. Such is the gist of hisaccount. The key terms of the doctrine are " not existent, not non-existent" and ineffable-ness, which are assumed to have been first clearly propounded in the "Tattvapatala" of thebodhisattvabhumi. The point is, things do not exist as expressed (namely, are not exis-tent) ; however, they are not non-existent in every way. Dharmas of ineffable nature exist.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesor rather, all dharmas are ineffable. This emphasis on the ineffableness of all dharmas carbe regarded as one of the consistent or penetrating mahayana-Yogacara doctrines since itis found not only in several layers of the Ybh, starting from the bodhisattvabhumi, but alsc〓asanga's mahayanasamgraha and vasubandhu's vyY and vimsika vs).3)Turning back to the relationship between the akbh and Ybh, as far as i can see, theitconresponding passages donot contain these two doctrines that vasubandhu himself definesas the teachings of the Mahayana. neither is it related to the penetrating yYogacara doctrineof the ineffableness of all dharmas, which is also regarded as distinctive of vasubandhu'sthought in that it is found in both the vyY and vs. Thus, what one can safely conclude isthat vasubandhu was aware of the existence of the Ybh when he wrote the akBh and bor-rowed some ideas from it.However, it is also true that a development of ideas is found in the traiectory of vasu-bandhu's thought and Sautrantika theories whose relationship with the Ybh has been re-vealed by previous studies play important roles. one of the most important temms amongthem is, as is well-known, samtatiparinamavisesa, which is found in the aKBh, karma-sidchi (kS),and pratityasamutpadavyakhyaSvy) and finally developed into the temmviinonaparinama in the same author's vs and trimsiko. another theory, although it can betraced back to the "darstantika" in the mahavibhasa, is criticism of the entity (dravya)theory of the Sarvastivada.In this paper, i would like to first point out that one of the most important or at leastmostfrequently mentioned Sautrantika theories in the akbh is criticism of the entity theory ofthe Sarvastivada. Then, i shall argue that this criticism, especially that of the existence ofjivitendriya (life faculty) and nikoyasabhagato (homogeneous character) as entities, be-came one of the stepping stones whereby vasubandhu came to accept dlayaviinona in hislater works.
2.The Sautrantika for vasubandhuinthe akBlSince there remains no text that summarizes Sautrantika doctrine by sautrantikas them-selves, one must rely heavily on what later commentators or opponents such as Samgha-bhadra say. however, there are two problems. First, their opinions cannot always to be tak-en at face value since it is sometimes the case that not only in later commentaries on theAkbh but also incommentaries onthe kS and vs the opinions of the commentators differ:
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist StudiesAccording to kato1989,the Sautrantika theories in this sense in the akbh number sevtheories that some attribute to the sautrantika are attributed to the abhidharmika, etc., byothers. Therefore, it is questionable how much of what they say reflects the actual state ofthe Sautrantika (if there was any such thing).Second, i have reservations about the useful-ness of relying heavily on the attributions of commentators or opponents when investigat-ing the meaning of the Sautrantika for vasubandhu.Thus, one of the safer methods for investigating the position of the Sautrantika for vasu-bandhu would seem be to confne oneself to materials that he himself declares to be of theSautrantika.
enteen. They are as follows.Criticism of the Sarvastivada theories that l. prthagianatva, 2. four characteristics ofconditioned forces, 3. asamskrta, 4. samsthana or form, 5. koyapijnapti,6. avijnapti,7.samvara, and 8. past and future are entities (ravya).9.interpretation of the term kamara-ga. 10. the problem of the maintenance of the mental continuumin the immaterial world(I will pick up the tenth argument in section3,9and 10are also related to criticism of theentity theoty).11.how visual consciousness arises.12.the buddha's knowledge aboutthe future dharma.13.The reason that some gods have different images.14. interpretationof dependent origination. 15. Interpretation of nutriment of volition.46. The state wherone obtains the aviinapti of samvara and asamvara.17.Fall from arhatship.As can be seen in the above list, as many as about 1of the seventeen (or sixteen) sau-trantika theories are criticisms of the entity theory ofthe sarvastivada.Futther, the importance of this criticismin the akbh is also attested by the fact that va-subandhu himself mentions this when he refers to his akbhin his later pSvy.PSvy (muroii ed.),100 Forces not associated with the mind (cittaviprayukia-samska-ra) are not entities (travya). They are just names for another state [of existing elements-.as for the way in which these do not exist as entities, you should understand it from [thedescriptionin] the dbhidharmakosa.In the following sections, i would like to show that this Sautrantika doctrine of criticismofentity theory foreshadows vasubandhu's introduction of dlayapiinana in his later works.3.criticism of entity theory and theintroduction of dlayaviinangIn this section, i would like to take a look at the function of iivitendriy (life force) and
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesnikayasabhagato (homogeneous character), members of the cittaviprayukta-samskaras(forces not associated with the mind), as described in the akBh.These two dharmas, life force and homogeneous character, are discussed in detail alongwith other members of the forces not associated with the mind in the second chapter of theAkbh. They are further discussed in the first part of the third chapter (kbh[pradhaned.],112).The argument is, in short, as follows.The abhidharmikas (Sarvastivada) state: in the kama- and ripa-dhatu (world), mincand mental states are supported by rupa (form/ visible matter). although there is no rupain the arupya-dhatu (immaterial world), mind and mental states have life force and homo-geneous character as their basis since, being arisen from special absorption(samapatti),they have strong power. Further, life force and homogeneous character support each other.The sautrantikas criticize: if that is so, since mind and mental states themselves are alsoarisen from special absorption in the immaterial world, they are strong enough to supporeach other. Therefore, there is no need of another basis such as life force or homogeneouscharacter.
as previous studies have pointed out, this argument by the Sarvastivada can, of course,be traced back to the mahauibhas 27137a).it states that in the immaterial worldwhere there is no rupa, the mental continuum, etc., exist with their bases in iust the samemanner as in the kom- and rip-dhatn. and in the koma- and rup-dhotu the mental con-inuum, etc., are supported by rupa too.in the immaterial world, on the other hand, thebasis of the mental continuum, etc., is merely forces not associated with the mind, such aslife force, homogeneous character, and attainment(* propti).Inthis way, the abhidharmikas assume the existence of the support for mind and mentalstates in the immaterial world arupy-dhatu), whereas the Sautrantikas do not admit itsexistence. however, if one further investigates the state of existence in the immaterialworld, this Sautrantika position turns out to be illogical. And that illogicality is solved bythe introduction ofalayaviinana.〓4.Proofof the existence ofulayaviinanaThe kS proves the existence of alayavijinana by pointing out four illogicalities that ariseif one does not admit its existence. in the third and fourth arguments, the kS points out theillogicality that occurs in the maintenance of the mental continuum in the immaterial
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt studiesworld.
KS(muroji ed.),41(19b (〓))when non-returners in the summit of existence who try to terminate impurity arouse the pure mind that belongs to the sphere of nothingness, what is the body thatis another entity by the existence of which it is said that they do not die from this [ worldthere isno other entity such as homogeneous character or life force at all. They are designations for themere similarity and continuing force of aggregates of retribution. There is no other entity suchassimilarity or continuing force.This text also points out that there is the problem of the existence of goti, realms of re.birth, if one does not admit the existence of olayavijnana kS,41.1b(ii)).The reason that vasubandhu had to deny the existence of homogeneous character andlife force as entities immediately after this argument seems to be that if one admits themasentities, this illogicality will not occur. it is the kS, which does not admit their existence asentities, that would face this illogicality. in this sense, the negation of the sarvastivada entity theory is closely related to the introduction of alayavijnana.85.Sautrantika in the kSvasubandhu refers to the Sautrantika only once again i a text later than the akBh. irthe kS, he supports the argument by "some Sautrantikas" that asserts that dlayaviinana ex-ists even in the absorption of cessation (nirodhasamapatti)(kS,37(18)).The Sautranti-ka to which vasubandhu himself refers is thus associated with the introduction of alayaviy-nna in the kS. In the akbh,on the other hand, many of the Sautrantika theories werenegations of entity theory. on the basis of the above, then, i would like to point to the Sau-trantika as a factor in vasubandhu's close connections with the introduction of alayaviina-na. it may also be possible to assume that he had in mind the existence of dlayaviinangwhen he denied the existence of jivitendriya and nikoyasabhagata in the akBh.6.Laterabhidharma textsIn order to reinforce the point that the criticism of iivitendriya and nikoyasabhagata wasclosely related to the introduction of dlayavijnana, i would like to take a look at the proofof existence of these two dharmas in later abhidharma texts. the point is that the argumentthat the later sarvastivada uses in order to prove the existence of these two as entities issimilar to that which the yogacaras or sautrantikas used in order to prove the existence of
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSdlayavijnona.Samghabhadra's nyoyamusara 9.458c) cites and criticizes the above sautrantika po-sition (sectionof this paper), namely, the negation of the two dharmas. it states: whenone who is bom in the immaterial world(*arupy-dhatu) arouses the mind of anotherstage (ie., of a lower stage) or pure(*anasrava) [mind], ifthere is no dharma at all thatbecomes a basis for the mental continuum. to what stage does this one belong?The abhidharmadipa, on the other hand, argues as follows:ad(jaini ed.),89.The fivitendriya that is the material cause of denominating realms of rebirtl(*gati) exists as an entity. since, otherwise, how cn one assume that which arose as maturationbNhich existence this one will not die from the realm ofrebirth (ie., aripya-dhotu).we finda similar argument in the abhidharmavatara" to.Since these points can, as far as i can see, not be found in earlier abhidharma texts, onemay even speculate that they borrowed this argument from those who tried to prove the existence of dlayavijnana.7.Conclusion
In this paper i have pointed out the close relationship of the Sautrantika for vasubandhuin the akbh to the introduction of dlayavijnana by pointing out that the negation of theSarvastivada entity theory, which is the most frequently mentioned Sautrantika position inthe akbh, especially that of jivitendriya (life force) and nikoyasabhagata (homogeneouscharacter), requires the existence of dlayaviinona since they performa similar function.(notes)
1)For details, see kritzer 05.2)these points are not discussed in detail here since i have dealt with theminhoriuchi2009.For reasons of space, reference should be made to this earlier work for the abbreviations and adetailed bibliography of the present paper.3)according to kao2008345,"vimsika seems to be the original" title of vasubandhu'stwenty verses.4)Iam skeptical about counting this as a sautrantika theory since although the sanskrit text andxuanzang's chinese translation have "sautrantika" here, it is missing inZhendi, tib. (akb(t),PGu12b3f., dku1asf.), and commentaries such as the abhidharmakosavyokhya(wogiwara ed., 318.4),laksanamusariniju3b4f.), and tattvartha Tho91alf.)5)They are also supported by forces not associated with themind.
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS6)vasubandhu negates the sarvastivada definition of these two dharmas. miyashita 22 pointsout that sthiramati, having seen that this position is criticized by Samghabhadra in connectionwith the problem of the maintenance of the mind and mental states in the immaterial world. in-troduced alayaviinana in order to defend vasubandhu.7)vedha. compared to the shooting of an arrow.8)This point has already been made in muroii1986and Schmithausen1987.The latter (249-250n.36)states: 〓The arguments are, of course, valid only on the assumption that a metaphysicalatmanor pudgala and hypostatized entities like the jivitendriya and the nikoyasabhagata of theVaibhasikas do not exist."In this paper, I have tried to take a further look at the argument about these two ddharmas inabhidharma texts, show the importance of criticism of entity theory in the sautrantika theoriesas found in the akBh, and trace a connection between the Sautrantika position in the akbh andthe introduction of dlayaviinana.9)Tno.155,Dno.47(Nyu318-319a),Pno.5599(Thu).(bibliography)Horiuchi toshio 200, seshin daiio bussetsuron. shakkiron diyonsho wo chushino shite, TheSankibo press. kano kazuo2, "two shott glosses o yogacara texts by vairocanaraksita: v-msikutikovrtti and dharmadharmatavibhagavrtti," sanskrit texis fom giuseppe tuccis collection,part i, Roma. kato junsho1989,kvoryobu no kenkyu, shuniusha. kritzer, Robert, 〓005, vasu-bandlhu and the yogacorabhumi: yogocara elements in the abhidharmakosabhasva, the internationalInstitute for buddhist studies. Miyashita seiki2002. 〓The Fault does Not reach the Sutrakara: oarguments about fivitendriy in the abhidharmakosabhasya," eardy budcthism hhidharmgThought,277300, heirakuji Shoten. Muroii Yoshihito 1986,"kusharon, jogoron, engikyoshaku,"〓fikkyo bunka, 156-i,82-99.Schmithausen, lambert,1987,tlayavinana: on the origin d theEabydevelopmenf of cemtral concept of yogacara philosophy, 2 vols., The international institute for buddhist Studies.<Key words) Sautrantika, dlayavijnana, vasubandhu, entity theory(Research fellow, The university of tokyo, ph.d.)
