The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSanatomy in the bhagavati aradhanaKAwaSaki Yutaka1.IntroductionThe bhagavati aradhana [bha]or the Mularadhana by sivarya (ca. 2nd century)ione of the digambar Jaiagamas and is classified under the category of carananuyoga("Expositions o [mendicant and lay] conduct").despite the importance of the bhainthe history of jainism, its complete version has not been critically edited and translated,and thus little research has been perfomed.〓in this paper, i will provide a summary ofBha021-29,where the knowledge of anatomy is given in the course of discussion ofthe impurity of the human body, and will make some remarks comparing the similar ana-tomical data found in the Tandulaveyaliya [tand], the carakasamhita [cS],the Susru-lasamhita [SS], the yajnavalkyasmrti [YS], the visuddhimagga [vism], and the garbha-upanisad [.I believe that this initial research will contribute not only to thephilological study of the bha, but also to the study of the development of anatomy in thetraditional indian medicine.2.anatomy, impurity ofthe body, and brahmavratgaccording to the bha, the path to fasting unto death (bhattapaccakkhana) consists of40stages.4 The 33rd stage is called anusatthi "successive instruction'; at this stage, a can-didate monk of fasting unto death arahaga khavaga) who is already sitting on the seatfor bhattapaccakkhana samthara) is whispered successively in his ears many importantJain doctrines by other Jain monk-teachers assisting his fasting niiavaya dyariyd) to for-tify his resolution to death. anatomical data is presented at this stage, especially in the in-struction of the fourth of the five great vows, brahmavrata "sexual restraint / celibacy.'Roughly speaking, in the bha the teachings of this vow consists of five parts: (1)sexualrestraint-871931(2)viewson womanhood-93996(3)impurity and transiency of
The  uapaneSe sSOciationofndian and BuddhiStStudiesthe human body-997-106(4) faults originating from association with young people-〓064-1078(5)virtues of sexual restraint, and the anatomical data(01-029)isfoundin),in other words, such a knowledge is said to show that the every part of thehuman body is impure and thus it should not be clinged to.Ineffect, the instruction of brahmavratais completed by the verse931.but sivarya adds(5)as the last portion and puts other three themes(2between)and (5).except(2),originally (3)and (4)might have been independent themes and have nothing to dowith brahmavrata, but at least in the present fomm of the bha, these two parts are strictlyconnected with celibacy. especially in the case of (3),the verses which simply tell of theimpurity or the transiency of the human bodyin general are sometimes intervened by theverses which emphasize the impurity of woman's body or the adoption of a celibate life ofsexual restraint based on the impurity of woman('s body)(1032,1043,1049-50,106-61).at present, it is not clear whether sivarya himself created such a constitution or not,and thus it calls for further consideration.what follows is the original text on anatomy as well as my summary on the text:<Text〓
atthini humti tinmi hu sadani bharidani kunimamaiice / savvammic'ev dehe samdhini havamti to .vadiva 21)
tharuna navasadim sirasadani havamti satt'eva/ dehammi mamsapesina humtipamc' evaysadami (022)
cattari sirojulani humti solsa y kamdarani taha  cha cc'eva sirakucca dehe do mamisaraiin y(1023)
satta tayao kalejiayani satt' eva homti dehammi / dehammi romakodina homti asidi sadasahassa(1024)
pakkamayasayattha ya amtagumiao solsq havamti / kunimcssa asaya satta humti dehe manusass(1025)
thunoo tinni dehammi homti sattuttaromc mammasadam  nava homti vanamuhoim miccam kumimamsavamtcim6)dehammi macchulimgam amialimittam sayappamanena  amialimitto medo uijo vi ya tattio c'ea(1027)
tinni y -amialio cha cc'eva ya amiatio pittassa mbho pittasamano lohidam addhadhaganhodi (1028)
muttam dhayamettam uccarassa ya havamti chappaccha/ vim nahani damta battisam homti pa-
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesgadie (12)
3.1. Summary and comments on ha021-029what sivarya says about anatomy in h1-29can be divided into the two cate-gories: a) the parts of the body and their respective numbers-(1)atthi (bone)300(2)samdhi (joint)-3?(tavadiya)3)nharu cord/ sinew)-(4)sira (ves-sel)-70(5mamsapesi (muscle)-(6)siraicl(net' of sira)7)kamdara (akind of cord so called)-16(8)sirakuccbrush' of sira)-69)mamsaraiu (rope' offlesh)-2(10)ty (skin)-7(11)kalejjiay Skt. kaleyaka)-7(12)romakodi (lit. hairend'hair)-800000(13)amtagumia (coils of intestine)〓16(14)asaya (recepta-cle)-7(15)thuna (pillar)-3(16)mamma (vulnerable point)107(17)vanamuha( mouth ofa wound,' here it is used as a synonym of chidra srotas)-9(18)naha (nail)・20(19)damta (tooth)-32.(b) the bodily constituents and their respective quanti-ties-(1)macchulimga (brain)〓anjali[s]sayqppamana  svapramana, that is, every-body has different quantity of brain mass.)(2)med (fat)-njati ?3〓Sktoias, vital force)-tattiya' (2)(4)〓s (tissue-fat)njalis(5)pitia (bile)-6anialis(6)simbha (phlegm)-6anjialis (lit. "same as [the quantity of] pitta'(7)lohid(blood)-.dhaka (8)mutta (urine)-dhaka(9)uccara (excrement)-oprasthasThere are some obscure expressions in that list.(i)both tavadiya and tattiya ina).(2)and ((4)are obviously the derivatives from Skt. tavat, but the concrete numbersdenoted by the two words are not very clear. as for the former, the commentator aparajiteexplains it as sandhipramanam api trisatam eva, "the number of joints is also just 300,that is, he understands tavadiya as denoting the identical number of joints and bones. bu1as for the latter, aparajita and another commentator asadhara give no comments. tattiycmay indicate amialimitto in the same line, but what this very expression means is also'ague (see 〓).(〓)amtagumiai(3) is explained as antrayastayah by bothaparajita and asadhara, but the etymon of-gumia is not given. although it is possible thatgumia is a desi which means yasti, it seems more probable that the word is derived fromskt. kubid8ecrooked, and amtagumia means that the intestine crooks,' in other words, i1s coiled 16 times in the human body. compare the expression antan ti.. ekavisativdthamesu obhaggo... "intestine . is 'bent down' at21 points.. . " i vismp.258.(〓)it isunclear what the word thun Skt. sthuna) in(15)actually means in the human body.aparajita gives no explanation on this word and in sadhara's view it means vata-pitta-
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSslesmanah. however, i have not been able to find such a usage of the word neither in theSvetambar and digambar jain texts nor in the buddhist and hindu (especially medical)literature. (〓V)there are two possibilities about the meaning ofamialimitto medoin27,(B)(2),one is that it simply means "the quantity of fat is lniali,' and another is thatpeople differ in the quantity of fat, if the word sayappamanena in the first line qualifies allthe quantities in that verse.4.bha021-029and other indianTextsIn the process of investigating anatomical knowledge presented in the bha, it is impor-tant to look into its background from the viewpoint of not only the jain but also hindu in-tellectual history. This investigation will serve also to unravel the complicated textual lay-ers of the bha. Here i will devote some space to the discussion of the intellectual source [s]of sivarya by giving a synoptic table in which the anatomical infommation of the bha iscompared with some other indian texts, owing much to the great results of scholars andes-pecially that of late professor c. caillat. due to the space limitation, i omit the most ofdiscussions and point out some synonymous words in the different traditions, such as vana-muha and srotas, uccora and purisa, andso on<Table: lists of the anatomical informationin the several indian texts>
The japanese sSOciationof Indian and buddhistStudiesAnatomy in the bhagavati aradhana (Y. kawasakl)*notes on the table:(*1)woman4 eunuch (pamdaga):480.(*2)woman 520.(*335000000,if the number of hair and beard is included.(*4)This is the number of roma, and those of hair an,beards are 30000.(*5)In khuddakapatha-atthakatha p.51(ts ed.) the expression navanavutilo-makupasahassa990 pores' is found.(*6)woman has eight (plus garbhasaya).(*7)on this dif-ference. see Y. Ikari and n. watase, japanese translation of the yainavalkysmrti (Tokyo,2002),.321.(*8)The GUwith the commentary by narayana: 107, the gu with the commentary by san-arananda:108.(*9the term usedis not ojas but slaismika ojas.(*10)tdiffers in accordance witheating and drinking .5. some remarksThe above comparison reveals some noteworthy points for the consideration of thesource [s] of the bha about anatomy. asa conclusion, i would like to list up these points:(1)the relationship between the bha and the Tand: the accordances of numbers andquantities are relatively partial. The quantities of bodily constituents especially differ wide-ly. This means that the Tand is not the only source for the bha (and of course vice versa)though it is possible to say that one might have refered to the other as one of many materi-als, or both might have quoted at length from the same sourcels」 unknown to us.(2)comparing bha with classical indian medical literature, the anatomical knowledge-especially the numbers of the body parts-of the bha is relatively closer to that of the SSthan that of the cS. but does not strictly corresponds to. Thus it is possible to assume thatthe author of the bha was more familiar with the medical tradition of the SS than that of
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSthe cS, but that he did not totally acquire his anatomical knowledge from the tradition ofSS and used further (unknown) material[s](3)there are many discrepancies in the quantities of bodily constituents among all thetexts used above. on the one hand, this fact seems to show that the author of bha knewsome different sources which are not known to us. on the other hand, the possibility that aquantity ofa unit might differ among different areas and different ages may not be exclud-ed. For example, 2anjalis in area a andsprasthas in area b might in fact denote the samequantity. however, producing evidence of sucha possibility is very difficult, if not impos-sible.
I wouldlike to thank dr. Stella Zhivkova for correcting my english.〓
1)k.L. wiley, historicl dictionary of jainismmaryland, tronto, oxford,2004),p.xxvi. oanother chronology, for example, see k. oetjens, sivaryas mularadhand: beitrag zukenmtnis der sterbefasten-literatur der jaincs (hamburg, 1976),in which he gave older date( st century a.D.)2)oetjens upra) made the critical edition and german translation of bha-70and88-〓159,but for some reasons this doctoral thesis has not been published yet.3)Thus in the present state of the study on the bha, it is hard to answer whether sivarya himselfcomposed (or at least compiled) every verse of the bha, or there are some later additions in it.So the expressions in this paper such as "sivarya's knowledge,"" sivarya says," etc. areexpedient.
4)on each stage in detail, see s. Settar, pursuing death, dharwad,1990,pp.25f5)The close comparison with the tand may be helpful for the consideration about this problemfor in the tand also the instructions about anatomy, embryology, and osteology are connectedwith the impurity of the human body (-153),and these teachings are followed by the teach.ings about many defects of women54-166).at the conference i briefly touched upon thispoint.
6)although j does not read ya, i adopt the readingof d from the metrical point of view.7)it should be noted that the arahanapadaya by virabhadda [arahPadv] has the parallel orsimilar verses of ha1-29,bha21arahpadv602,bha22arahPadv603,bha1023arahPadv604,bha24arahPadv605,bha25 arahpadv 606,〓ha26: thesecond line of arahpadv606and the first line of607,bha027:the second line of arahPadv607,bha028arahPadv 608,bha29arahpadv609.The full version of the correspondence table is now being prepared by me.8)Thoughit is hard to explain why the gender ofthis word is feminine.9)c. Caillat. "Sur les doctrines medicales du Tandulaveyaliya," the adyr libryulletin,
The uapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies1974,pp.102-114.My knowledge about traditional indian anatomy owes also to: g. J. meulen-beld,ahistoryof indicm medicl literature, volume latext/ volume ibannotation, gronin-gen,1999,t. Yamashita, "The anatomical knowledge of ancient indian medicine (Ayurve-da)," builetinof the society for westernd southersiatic studties, kyoto universify,4.1994,pp.1-2 japanese),T. Yamashita, "sarirasthana of the ayurveda-acomparativestudy-,"indo shisoshi kenkyyn7,1995,pp-113,k. g.zysk, "The Evolution of anatomi-cal knowledge in ancient india, with Special Reference to cross-cultural influences," jaos106-4,1986,pp75.Abbreviationsandtandulaveyaliya. painnayasuttaim i, Jaina-agama-series no.17-1, bombay,ArahPadvarahanapadaya by virabhadda. painnayasuttairt, jaina-agama-series No.17-1.bombay,1987.〓Garbha-upanisad. upanisadam samuccayah, ananndasramasamskrtagrantavalihgranthankah29,pune, 1925.)carakasamhita. the charakasamhitignivesa. revisedby charaka addrdhabalwith the ayurveda-dipiko commemtry of chakrapanidatta. kashi Sanskrit Series228. Varanasi.1984.Tand
1984.
bhagavati aradhana. hcarya sivaryya viracita bhagavati aradhana cry aparojitasuri racita vijayodaya tika tatha tadanusari hindi tika sahita), jivaraj jairGranthamala Hindi vibhaga puspa36, Solapur, 2004.[〓i sivakoti acarya viracita mularadhana aparanama bhagavati aradhana), sriSvami devemdrakinti digambar jain Gramthamala2, Solapur, 1935.[DYainavalkyasmrti. the yainavalkyasmrti wirh the commentaryblakrida ofvisvaripochoryya, New delhi,1982.visuddhimagga. the visuddhi-aggof buddhaghosa, london The pali textSociety,1975.susrutasamhita. susrutasamhita of susruta with the nibandhasangraha commentaryofi dalhanachory d the nyayacandrik anika of ri gayadasachary ovidinasthana. jaikrishnadas avurveda Series 34. Varanasi,1997.(Key words) bhagavati aradhana, anatomy, ayurveda(Part-time lecturer, kansai university. Ph.d.)
