The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt StudiesVasanaitrimsikoavijnaptibhasyKANabISHAkihiroLast year, i contributed to this journal dealing with vasana (latent impression) in yo-gabhasy h: ca.4-5.comparing the concepts of samskara and vasanain the Ybh, iclarifed the difference between them.!IYbh samskara plays an important role in terms of both soteriology, as well as its goal,namely, samddhi. The theory to terminate the samskara is thus described systematically indetail. on the other hand, vasana is confined to the subordinate position. it is not explainedsystematically.what is vasan? from such a question, i started researching from the viewpoint of thewhole history of indian philosophy and literature how people other than yoga school un-derstand and use that concept. For this occasioni took the text of Yogacara school. becauseit is likely that this school has a strong influence on yoga school. Especially i choseTrimsikavijinaptibhasytrbh: ca.6c), sthiramati's commentary on vasubandhu'sTrimsikakariko r: ca.5-6c) because it should have been written not so far from Ybhwith reference to the time. the aim of this paper is to analyze how sthiramati uses the con-cept of vasana and to classify it.3)1. karm-vasand, grahadvay-vosanuThrough the whole part of tr, vosana is referred only twice in one sutra, in r19.whicksays"Icooperation with grahadvay-vasand, korma-vusanus generate it which is anotheimaturation, when the previous maturation is wom away.4) these karma-vasana and gra-hadvay-vasand are commented by sthiramati as follows.karma-vasand: karma-vasanais the ability placedoalaya-vijnana to make existence of Self at-mabhava) come into being in the future.. Existence of self will come into different states by theifference of destiny (gati) influenced by karma-vasana.Grahadvay-vasanc: grahadvaya means the cattachment to what is seized〓(grahya-graha) and
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS<that to what seizesgrahaka-graha).among the two, the former is the apprehension that what isseized is settled in the succession of itself independently fromconsciousness viinana), the latter isthe apprehension that [ what is seized] is received, recognized, and grasped by the consciousnessGrahadyayc-vasana is the seed for the same kind of the cattachment to what is seized and to whatseizes come out in the future drawn by the cattachment to what is seized and to what seizes>previously generated.9,As Sthiramati notes in another place, " accompanied by grahadvay-vasana, karmg.vasanus generate "it', namely, dlaya-vijnana which is the maturation different from alreadyconsumed one."7)Vasanas referred in these passages can be classifiled into two types in terms of characterType(1)karma-vasana is the latent impression generated from good and evil deeds, andwill regenerate different existences of Self by the difference of destiny (gati), and alscmake dlaya-vijnana supported by grahadvay-vasand. This vasana can be characterised asthe latent remains which have substantive aspect. type(2)Grahadvaya-vasana is gener-ated from the attachment to the misconceptions about what is seized and what seizes. Thisis the latent impression which has cognitive aspect.lt is explained that these two types of vasana do not work independently, but producedlaya-vijnanaincooperation with each other.2.vipdk-vasand, misyand-vasandIn tr19,it is stated that "<the alteration [of consciousness」〓(viinana-parinama)comes in three kinds.8Besides, [<the alteration of consciousness〓vijnana-parinama) ]on which the figurative expres.sion about Self and the like (dtma-ad-upacora) and that of objects (dharma-upacura) are basecs divided in terms of cause and result. among these two cthe alteration of cause〓hetu-parina-ma) is that <the vasana of maturationvipaka-vasana) and[that of] fowing〓isyanda-vasa-na) are nourished in dlayq-viinana, <the alteration of result〓phala-parinama) is that becausevipaka-vaisana gets at operation vipaka-vasan-vrtti-iabhat), dlaya-viinana appears among variousclasses of similar beings (nikoya-sabhoga-amtaresu) when the drawing of previous karman is com.pleted. [<The alteration of result〓is also that <consciousness in actionpravrtti-viinana) and<the afhicted mind〓(klista-manas) come out from alay-viinana because misyanda-vasana getsat operation nisvand-vasana-vrtti-labhat).among these two, pravrtti-vijnana [ which is of twctypes], good and evil ones, puts both vipak-vsana and misyand[vsad ]in the dly-viinana,but klista-manas which is neutral (pyakyta) puts only misyanda-vasana [n the dlaya-vi nana]9In this part, <the alteration of consciousness〓vinana-parinama) is divided into <the
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSalteration of cause> (hetu-parinama) and <the alteration ofresult(phala-parinama).judging from the sthiramati's note to tr b, dlaya-vinana, klista-manas, andpravrtti-vinana correspond to alteration' vipaka), "thinking' (manana), "representation of ob-jects' (visaya-vijnapti) respectively.1as these three are the components of vinana.parinama,1 the two vasanas referred here are related to the entirety of viinana-parinama.They are functioning as the materials for dlaya-vinana, klista-manas, andpravrtti-vinanawhich are the basis for everything, namely, every cognition from the viewpoint of vijnapti-motratd.
what i want to point out here is that vipdk-vusana has no more function than to gener-ate dlaya-viinana. The vinana-parinama further will be made by the virtue of nisyandu-vasana alone, klista-manas and pravrtti-vijnana, too, are botn from this vasana.3.vosand as wpddiItr bab, Vasubandhu says that "The [alayaviinana] has unrecognizable <reception(upadi) and <representation of place〓 sthana-viinapti."1)sthiramati gives the explana.tion to the word "upodi" that " [upodi] is the vasana of the attachment to imagined natureparikalpita-svabhava), and is form rupa) as sense organ and also name (nama), whickboth have a firm basis."13)further Sthiramati says as followsThis [upadi] is the vasana of the imagination of Self (atman) and the like, and also the vasana ofthe imagination of objects (dharma) like form rupa) and so on. because of the [upadi], theimagination of Self etc. and that of fomm etc. are received upatta) by dlaya-viinana as a result, sohe upadiis said to be the vasana of the imagination of Selfetc. and of fommetc.14In these passages the upadi is equated to the vasana of "the attachment to imagined na-ture,' "the imaginationof self,' and the imagination ofthings.' compared with the vipaka-vasana and nisyanda-vasana, which generate the dlaya-vinana, klista-manas, andpravrtti-viinana, this upddi is related to the fundamental cognition that takes place in ulaya-vinana.15)
4.conclusion
According to the analysis so far, the vasanas referred in trbh can be classified into twc
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSTypel vsanas of this type generate dlaya-vinana, klista-manas, and pravrtti-viinana, which arethe basis for <figurative expressioupacara), cognition and so on.Type 〓 vasanas of this type cause misconception about self (atman) or obiects (dharma) and scon, and take place fromthe attachment to such a misconceptionIntrbh1,although karma-vasana has a function to generate dlaya-viinana, it cannotproduce its effect by itself but only with the cooperation of grahadvay-vasana.In th1, vipaka-vasana is explained as generating ulaya-vinana, and it is same wittkarma-vasana. nisyanda-vasama also has the substantial aspect that it serves as the materiafor klistc-mamcs and prapriti-vijnana. This misyand-vasand, however, can be said to havea function similar to grahadvaya-vasana, in that it helps the evolution of viinana-parinamanamely, the generation of alayapijnana further on. For, it is only misyand-vasana that cangenerate both klist-manas andpravrti-viinana, which are the origin of those two vdsanus.Onthe other hand, vipaka-vasana cannot do so.The vasana as upadi referred in trbh bab is described as having only the cognitive as-pect.
Thus it appears to me that Sthiramati presents the concept of vasana in the way that ithas two major aspects, which are somehow mutually related.1)kanabishi, akihiro(金斐哲宏)[20]"yogabhasya niokeru vasand: samskara tono hikaku,chushin toshite" (Yogabhasyaにおけるvasana-samskaraとの比較を中心として-).Indogaku bukkyogaku kenkui(印度學佛教學研究)58-1,pp.(2236).2)The texthat i used is: hartmut buescher [207]sthiramafis trimsikauinaptibhdsa, criticul editions ofthe sns krit text and its tibetcranslation, verlag der osterreichischen akademie derwissenshaften, wien.3)we only have few previous studies about vasana of tror trbhuiike's research is one of them. uike, akio(氏家昭夫)[1967]"Yuishikisetsu niokenu jikke tcTenpen nitsuite"(唯識説における習気vasanaと転変parinamaについて),indogk bukkyogoku4kenkyn(臼度學佛教學研究)16-1,pp.16171.4)karmano vasang grahaduapavcsaaya soha ksine purvavipoke 'nyam vipokn jancycmti iattr19,p.112,1l.9-).5)trbhad. tr1,p.112,11.11-12,17-18.6)trbh ad. tr19,p.11,1l.13-17.7)trbd. tr19,p.11,il.8-10.8)parinamah  tridha19d).9)trbh ad. tlld, p.48,1l.15-21.10)trbh ad. tr 2b.p.50,1.4-8.11)vipoko mananakhycs c.vijnaptir visayasya cab. p.50,1. 3).12)asamviditakopadisthanavijnaptika cta(Tr bab,p.52.1.6).13)trbh ad. tr bab, p.52,1.4-5.14)trbh ad. tr bab,p.52,〓1.9-13.15)upadi or upadana is a problematic concept not only in Yogacara scool, butalso in sarvastivada. there are many previous studies about this concept. For example: hita,
The japanese association of indian and Buddhist studieschio(樋田道男)[1991] pana no mondai" upadanaの問題),〓ndkbuyogahrenbym(印度學佛教學研究)39-2, pp.113)takasaki, jikido(高崎直道)[1985.axavashiki to engi shiu tono kanren"(アーラヤ議と縁起-執受upadanaとの関連-hialawa akira hokase koki kinen ronshi bukkvo shisomo sho-mondoi(平川彰博士古稀記念論集仏教思想の諸問題),tokyo: shunjul-sha,pp.3-53takeuch, shoko(武内紹晃)[1985]:ayishikigaku ronsho niokeru shuju no utatsu no Yorei"(唯識学論書における執受の二つの用例)ramoi shzen hokase koki kinen buko to l-shikyo(雲井昭善博士古稀記念仏教と異宗教). kvoto: heirakuji-shoten, p.267-278.especially the latter wo contain he tanslation ofthe part of trbh conceming this paper, and also adetailed analysis ofit.(Key words) vasana, sthiramati, trimsikavjnaptibhasya(Graduate student, kyoto university)
