The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudies〓rules of upasampaddlocanain vyavaharabhasyaFujiMoto Yumi0.IntroductionVyavaharabhasy vbh) is a commentary o vyavaharasutra. vbhl defines eachword of vyavaharasutra l with dogmatic explanations and gives some additional rules.upasampadalocana is one of three dlocanas which are given as explanation for the worc'aloeiia"ivyvaharasutral,1.h1, uvasampaya upasampadin tika) means "en-tering another gana for the sake of higher study." at the time of entering, a monk has totel his innocence, or he confess his offence and atone it. This confessionlocana) is un.derstood as upasampaddlocano. however, vbh1,244-32regulates rules for uvasampayain detail rather than the confession. They are explained separately in brief as rules forwvasampaya and rules for upasampadalocana by c. caillat. in this paper, i give an out-line of vh1,2432and shows some important gathas.wvasampaya is held in this process:<1confession by a monk who has come forwvasampaya, and enquiry from acarya with checking purity in departure and arrival, >three days' inspection between the entering monk and the accepting acur,vsam-paya is confirmed.invh1,245-302, rules are given in detail for1dcf.1.and2.in this paper).confession at the time of1dis also provided (cf.1.and5. in this paper).The edition referred to in this paper is Ganadhipati sri tulsi-acharya Mahapraina-Samani kusumprajna, vyavahara bhasya, Jain vishva bharati institute, Ladnun, India,1996.in the following translation,()and[]is based on tika, and(())and [[issupplied by this researcher.1.1.confession and enquiry: vbh1,245-248confession is held when a monk arrived at another gana for uvasampaya. This confes-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiessionis held about offences against the five-fold mulaguna and the ten-fold uttaraguna.the monk has committed no lpa "few")offence, confession is held on the same day inthe way of ogha- n general).if he has committed an offence, confession is held in detail(padavibhaga) within several days. acary- should also enquire the monk on the day whenhe arrives. (according to tikao vh1,248, the acaryy' asks "where are you from? whereare you going? why did you come?").if the monk is tired, the dcarya does not have to askhim. however, in this case, the acarya should ask him within three days.:egamanega tipasesu, hotioghe yapadavibhage yupasampayavarahe, hoyamanoyamparicchamtidivarato uvasampaya, avaradhe divasato pasatthammiuvvato taddivasam, tinhamtu atikkame gurua〓samamumnaduganimittam, uvcsampajjamta hoti emevgannamanunne navarim, vibhagato korane bhaiyam47〓padhamadinamavipphale, lahuo bitie guru taie lahupgtecciya akadhane suddthamasuddho vimehimtu" [alocand] of upasampada and offence (aparadha) is on one day and in several days in ogha (igeneral) and in padavibhaga (in detail).about avasyaka etc., they acarya)) does not inspectamonk]who is known. They inspect[[amonk]]whois not known.upasampadd- [locana in vibhaga] is [[held]] in daytime and at night. [alocana] i case of of-fence (aparadha) is in daytime on auspicious [day]. he (the monk having come and entering) istired on that day. Then if three days pass [ without acarya's enquiring], [four] heavy(pro-longed))[months of parihorasthana] [[are charged to the acarya].4Amonk of samanunna (samanojna, a monk who has the same practice) entering for the sake oftwo pupposes (inana and darsana) is in this way (in the way of viharalocanain ogha by monks ofamanojna).4) only in case of a monk of amnamanumna, 〓 locana] is in wibhaga i detail). ifthere is a reason, bhajand (alternative option) is applied.71/In case of no enquiry on the first day, one light ((shortened))month of pariharasthana isharged]. in case of [no enquiry] on the second day, one heavy month [ofprayascitta is charged].Incase of [no enquiry] on the third day, four light months [of proyascitta is charged]. and whenhe((the monk having come))does not talk, they (the same prayascittas) are[[charged to him]].There is pure and impure[[monk]] regarding themthe followings, cf.1.2.in this paper)) too128
before three days" inspection cf.2. in this paper), purity and impurity in departure andarrival are checked. defilements in departure are listed inten words invh1,249andex-
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesplained in ibid.250-256(cf. callat3 note 2).if a monk has one of ten defilements, heshould not be accepted.:adhikaranavigatijioge, padinie thaddhaluddhaniddhammealasaamubaddhavere, sacchamdamati payahiyovte 29〓(dvaragatha)"(1)ahiyarana adhikarana, quarrel),(2)vigai ([complaint about abstinence of] vikyti),3joyyoga, [complaint about hard] activity [[of penance]]),(4)padinia (pratyanika, enemy),(5)thadha stabcha, paralysed [by pain]),(6)ludh ldhra, greed),(7)niddhamma (nird-harma, apart from[[good]]nature),(8)alasa lasa, lazy),(9)amubaddhaver anubaddha-vaira, being bound to enemy),(10)sacchandamati (svacchandamati, having selfish idea).hsshould be left."There can be problems in the side of acarya or other monks in the former gacchc(group) too. They are also explained invh1,257-263as cases when the acarya in theformer gaccha- possesses cloth etc. improperly, when the acaryya does not have enoughknowledge about sutta and attha, when the dcarya asks him and tells it to other monks[[asif he has known], when the dcary or other monks have disease, when senior monks inthe former gaccho are old and need to be taken care, and when the dcarya's disciples donot do guru's order by themselves and give it to him. if the monk having come complainsabout one of these cases, he should not be accepted. (Here padicchaya, Sk. praticchaka, isseenin vh1,261-263and tiko. he is a " disciple" as well as "a monk who comes to an-other gana to study at a higher level," cf. ca53).The impurity in arrival is also explained in h1,264.ifa monk has impurity in arriv-al, acarya should accept him after giving proyascitta.2.Three days" inspection: vh1,265-274only a monk who is free from impurity in both departure and arrival is accepted. Theninspection(pkt. pariccha, Sk. pariksa) is started after the acceptance. in the period of in-spection, the monk who has come for uvasmpaya is called sisya, " disciple").acaryyaand the sisa inspect with each other about avassaya andso osuddham padicchiunam, apadicchane lahugatinni divasanisise dyarie va pariccha tatthima hotil265〓avassaga-padilehana sajjhae bhumiane ya bhasae〓viyare gelanne, bhikkhaggahane padicchamtil266〓"after accepting [[amonk]]whois pure, then this inspection (pariccha) in disciple or dcarya is
The uapanese association of Indian and buddhistStudiesheld for three days. in case of no inspection(padicchana), one light [month of proyascitta ischarged]. 5/
They ((the disciple and acurya)) inspect about avasyaka daily routine), pratilekhana (examin-ing), svadhyay (self-study), eating food, language, outside-activity viyara), disease, and attain-ment of begged food. 2"If the sisa (the monk having come and entering) does not behave properly, the acaryashould advice (sareti) and stimulate (codeti) him. Vh1,274and its tika explain thatuvasampaya takes place when the monk returned [towards siksa], orif he does not return.he should go another place.3.efforts forimpurityindeparture: vh1,275-279To keep back a monk whose departure is impure, Vh1,276lists several kinds of effort(Pkt. jayana, Sk. yatana) and,278-279explains them: saying "here there is no suticwhich you want," eoutside-activity is not allowed for a monk alone here," "here monksmake you be in a circle while eating, studying and so on," ego far for begging alms, thereare many fool monks here," and "there is no vikrti here," immediate imposition ofprayascitta, and leaving the monk when he is sleeping.:niggamane parisuddhe, agamane suddha demti pacchittammiggamane aparisuddhe, imai jayanaya varemtill2751natthi samkiyasamghodamamdati bhikkhabahiranayanepacchitta 'viussagge, niggamasuitassa channenm76varagotha )"ifa monk is pure in departure[ [from the former gaccha]] and impure in arival [[at another gccha], they carya))impose prayascitta [to him]. if [he is] impure in departure, they c-arya)) keep [him] back by this ((following))effort. 27[Saying] there is no doubted [sruta]. grouping. circling. Leading outside for begging alms.prayscitta. abandonment [of vikyti]. departure with deceiving [ [the monk]]who has slept.t276"
4about Purposes and periods of uvasampaya: vh1,24301Three punposes and two kinds of period are explained inh,84-286. wvasampayais taken for the sake of nana (inana, "knowledge"),damsana (arsana, "faith") or caritta(caritra, "conduct"), and its period is temporal (ittara, itvara) or life-long yovakahia,yavatkathita). uvasampaya for nana and damsana is explained invh1,285-289.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studieswvasampaya for coritta is taken to do veyavacca "service" or to do khamana "fast." Thcase of veyovacca is explainedin90-292,and the case of khamana is explained in93-301.cf. calat62.5. ulocana by a monk entering and having been accepted: vh1,302at the end of rules for uvasampayaloyana, Vbh1,302explains about dlocand again.This dlocana is also held about offences against mulaguna and uttaraguna. tika explainsthat this dlocana is given by the monk "entering and having been accepted" (or " admitted"cf. cala:129)based on vow miyama) in the same way of sambhogika monks' viharal-ochd. :
dloyana taha cevay, muluttara novari vigadite mamtuitham sran coyana, nivedanam te viemeva02〓"and then, dlocana is [[held]in the same way (as viharalocana by monks of samanoina).afterconfessing (vigadite) only about the basic (mulaguna) and the additional (nttaraguna), however.[he ((the monk)) says] this. at that time saranamadvice) and coyanamstimulation) [[is requested]]. They carya))also [make] mivedanam(statement) in this way.The underlined words said by the entering monk and by the accepting acaryya are giveniniko:
dloyana me dinna icchami saranavaranacoyanamti tepyevamevapratibhanamto nivedanam kurvamti aia amhe soreiia, vareijid, coiira, iti[[The monk says]"locana is given by me. i wish for advice (saranam), protection (varanam)and stimulation coyanam)." Theycorya)) also make statement with replying, "now we willadvice, protect, and stimulate."Note
1)vvayavarasutra 1,1je bhikkhu masiycm parihora-fthanam padisevitto dloejia, apaliumciycdloemanassa masiyam, paliumciya dloemanass domasiyam(scHubRing, w., drei chedasutrasdes jin-kanons, alt- und Neu-indische studien1, hamburg,1966,p.31).This sutra isexplained in vh1,184-323explanation for je and bhikkhuvh1,1195),mas96-209),parihara (2-212),thana(2-219),padiseva 21-231),dloyano viharalocana:234-235,two types of confession:236-239,definition of aparadha2243, upasampadulo-cana:302, parudhalocana:-316),and vavaharins explanation for paliumcipa ancapaliumciya, 317-323).2)les expiations dans le riituel ancien des religieux jaina, publication de l'institut de civilization
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesindienne, Fascicule25,paris, France,1965,pp.77-82and pp.14149d atonements in theancient rinuclof the jaina onks, l. d. Series4,ahmedabad, lndia,1975,pp.1-65and pp.127-129(The latter is referred toin this paper).3)hutagunaaparadha in vh1,224cf. ca 17)is(1)injury to living beings,(2)telling a lie and laughing,(3)taking what is not given,(4)remembering enjoyment of sexualunionin past through rubbing and so on,(5attachment [to instruments ] and taking the excess,(6)using ointment or ginger and so on. uitaragunaparadhainvh1,469471(cf. caIa:107)is(1)pindss visodhi ("purity in terms of food." Three guptis are listed here inh1,243),(2)(6) five smitis (circumspection),(7)and (8)six-fold external and internalpenance tapas),(9)twelve-fold bhiksupratima, and (0)four-fold abhigraha (self-restriction).4)viharalocana locana of wondering") is held only among samanoina monks, cf. caa:126f.
5)tika explains amnamanunna as "anya and amanoina, namely bhinnasambhogika and asamvi-gna."
6)vigoi (vikrti) is nine or ten kinds of food, such as milk, curd, ghee, butter, sarpis, oil, honey,alcohol, meat and marrow. cf. caIlat:1, schubRinG, w., The doctrine of the jainas, Secondrevised edition, Motilal banarsidass, delhi,2000,p.276, and so on<Key words) wvasampaya, dlocana, upasampaddlocano, mulaguna, uttaraguna(Graduate student, The university of pune )
