The  uapanese sSOciation ofIndian and buddhiststudiesThe concept of rupa and murtatva in the vaisesika School:aStudy of Concept of Matterin ancient indiaMiuRa hirofumi0. IntroductionThe concept of matter was one of the most important problems in western thought. inIndia, it has not been disregarded, though there was no concept exactly corresponding tomatter. only few attempts, however, have so far been made at the concept of the matter inancient india.The vaisesika School, which is one of six indian orthodox schools of philosophies, isknown as ancient realism. in this paper, the author intends to examine the theoretical struc-ure of the concept of "matter' in this school, based on the three main texts, the yaisesika-sutra a.d.), the dasapadarthi(勝宗十句義論4-5c.a.d.),1〓 and the prasastapada-bhasy.a.d.).
The vaisesika system has two different material concepts. one is rupa, the other murta-tva. little attention has been given to this point. we will begin by considering these twoconcepts.
1.The rupq
Basically, the rupa is a word meaning both color and form, and was used to indicatematter in ancient india. in the vaisesika school, the rupa is one of guna (attribute) that isone of six padartha-s (basic categories)also in the vaisesika school, the meaning ofripa was the same as its general meaning in ancient india until the time of the vaisesika-sutra. but after the dasapaddrthi, the rupa was strictly limited to only one meaning, thatof color. The question is the change in this meaning.1.1.The rupain the vaisesikasutrgIn the vaisesikasutra, the rupa is defined to the color and form belonging to the trvy(substance), and enabling perception with eyes.i other words, only drovya with the
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesripa can be perceived by eyes.4lso the rupa enables perception ofmotion of substanc-es.〓 to take a simple example, sabd(sound) without the rupa cannot be perceived witheyes,〓 though the motion of substances which have the rupa can be perceived with eyes.viewed in this light, the rupa in the vaisesikasutra can be regarded as an important con-cept that enables perception of substance and its motion, and a word that almost indicatesmatter in the vaisesika school as well as ancient india.1.2.The rupain the dasapadarthi and the prasastapadubhasyaalso in the dasapadorthi and the prasastapadabhasya, the rupa is one of guna belonging to the dravya, anda concept ofenabling perception with eyes." however, there was nsdescription which relates rupa to the movementin the dasapadorthi and the prasastapada-bhusya. it was that the temm of murtatva began to be used as a term for form at about thesame time as the dasapadorthi. in the following the prasastapudabhasya, moreover, theterm of rupa was used only to mean color, and the term of murtatya meant form of themoving substance. to sum up, the change in the meaning of the rupa happened as a resultof the murtatva, which was a new concept of fommin the Vaisesika school. The questionwhich we must considernextis the concept of murtatva.2.The murtatyaThe word "murtatva' is derived from the past passive participle of root of 'murch" byadding the suffix 'tva' meaning solid. and the murtatya is used to mean material form inthe vaisesika school after the dasapadorthi.2.1.The murtatyain the dasapadorthiIn the dasapadarthi, the concept of muriatva is used as the murta(有質礙,materiaform) in the part of explanation of the motion. The motion is classified into five types inthe dasapadarthi, the one of which is the gamana (going). The gamana is caused by theveg (velocity) belonging the murta-dray(substance with material form),the vegodoes not exist except the dravya which has murta.8 inother words, only the murta-dravy〓an do the gamana,  and the distinction of movable things and immovable things is thesame as the distinction of dravya with murta and dravya without murta.1 it follows fromwhat has been said that the murta (or murtatva), in the dasapadorthi, was an importantfactor of substances which can move.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies2.2.The muriatyain the prasastapudabhosyaalso in the prasastapadcbhasya, the concept of muriatva is discussed in the relation tomotion. The murtatva is a common character of five moving dravya, which are ksiti(earth) , jl (water), jpotis (fire), amila (air), and manas (consciousness).11)and exist-ing in the murta-dravya is the one of twelve common characters of the movement.1,Namely, only the murta-dronyravya with murtatua, or substances with material form,has mobility, and the concept of murtatva has a close relation to the motion.all these things make it clear that the dasapadorthi and the prasastapudabhasya havethe congruous views about the concept of the murtatva. both of them consider the murta-〓a as an important concept relating the motion.3.conclusion
lt should be concluded, from what has been said above, that the change in the usage otripa occurred simultaneously with introducing the new concept explaining motion of sub-stances, which is the murtatva, in the text of dasapadorthi.The usage of rupa remained as the guna belonging to the dravya, and a concept of en-bling perception by eyes. This usage may be common to throughout the yaisesikasutra,both in the dasapadorthi and the prasastapadabhasya, and was inherited by posterior theNyaya-vaisesika school. we have, however, the most significant fact that the rupa enabledperception of motion of substances until the vaisesikasutra, but the usage of rupa wassubdued, as was showed by the fact that there was no description that rupa related tomovement since the dasapadarthi.on the other hand, the murtatva, which is not discussed in the yaisesikasutra, began tcbe used simultaneously as an important factor of movement in the dasapadarthi and theprasastapddabhasya. the murtatva means material form, and only the murta-dravy (sub-jtances with material form) can move. and the concept of rupa cames to be used only tomean color since the dasapadorthi.Then, why did not the rupa relate to the motion and did not comes to be used only tomean color? it is for this reason that the problem of movement of the vayu (air) and thenans (consciousness) arose. The movement of the vayu cannot be seen with eyes, be-cause the vayu does not have the ripa. Since the manas is minute, the movement of themanas cannot be seen with eyes, either. Therefore, the factor of movement common to the
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesvanyu and the manas are needed, and its factor is the murtatva.Most significantly, the problem of how to conceive and explain motion of substances,which was the very peculiar to vaisesika school, affected the concept of matter itself, andbrought the change of usage of the concept of the rupa and the murtatva, which are thematerial concept, in the vaisesika theory. in the vaisesika system, the concept of matterhas a close relation to their original movement theory.<Notes)
1)Since original sanskrit texts of the dasapadarthi have been lost in india, we examine aChinese version translated by xuangzang(玄奘:602-664)of the dasapadurthiin thipaper.
2)vSc11: rupa-rasa-gandha-sparsh snkhyah parimanani prthaktvam smyoga-vibhaguuparatya-aparatve buddhyah sukha-duhkhe icch-dvesau prayatnas c gua p. 2,1l.1719)。3)vsc4.. mahaty aneka-dravyavattvad rupacc upalabdhihp.33,1.2).4)vsc4 rupa-smskora-abhavad vaay aupalabdhih(p.33,1.8).vSC.9 aneka-drawrena dravyena samavoyad ripa-visesacc upalabdhihvSc:p.33,1.12).
5)vsc4.112samkhyh parimanani prthaktvam samyog-vibhdguu paratva-qparatve karmac rupi-drovya-samavayoc caksusani/ p.33,1l.〓2)vScarupisv acaksusatut / (p.34,1.3)6)vSc22.28 sabd] acuksusattvcn ma karma/p.21,1.15.7)P[3:色云何.謂,唯眼所取,一依,名色.[what is the rip? That which is perceived only by eyes and has one [substance] as its locus is the rupa.] (p.256,1.1),40]:現量者,於至實色等根等合時,有了相生,是名現量.[The direct cognition: That which takesform of direct experience and is produced when perceivable substances, the rupa and sense or-gans and so oncome in contact [ which each other] is direct cognition.] (p.257,1.2).〓bh[27]:trayanam pratyaksatva-rupavattva-dravatvani /.24,1.12),[80tatra rupamcaksur-grahyamprthivy-udaka-jvalan-vgtti dravya-udy-upalambhakamnoyana-sahakori suk-〓-y-aneka-prakaram salila-adi-paramanusu nitym parthiva-paramanusv agmi-samyog-virodhi sarv-kury-dravyesu korana-guna-purpakam asraya-vinasad eva vinasyati itip.104,11.1-5.
8)d[54]:作因者,謂,攅擲等生業所生,依附一實,有質礙實所有勢用,是名作因.行,謂勢用.[The cause of action: That which is produced by action caused by hitting, shaking andso on, has one substance as its locus and is the veg velocity) of the murta-draysubstanceswith material fomm) is cause of action, that is, impression called the vega.j (p.257,1.2-21).9)dp5:行業云何.謂,一切有質礙實和合,依一實,合離因,名行業.[what is thegamana (going)? That which is inherent in all of the mirta-dravy(substances with materialform),has one substance as its locus and is the cause of connection and separation is move-
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesment.] (p.258,1l.5-6).10)dP[5]:如有動作無動作,有質礙無質礙,有勢用無勢用,有彼此〓無彼此艘,應知亦爾.[it should be known that the distinction between movable things andimmovable things isthe same as that between things with murta and things without murta, between things with ve-locity and things without velocity and between things with priority and posteriority and withoutpriority and posteriority.] (p.259,1.15.11)pbh[23ksiti- j-jyofir-anila-manasam kriyovattva-murtapa-paraty-qparapva-vegavatt-vani /p.21.1l.21-22)12)pbh[3]utksepana-adinam pancanam api karmatva-sambandhahek-dravyavattvamksanikatyam mirta-dravyavrttipvamagunavattvam gurunva-dravatva-prayatna-samyogajatvansva-karya-samyoga-virodhitvam smyoga-vibhaga-nirapekya-karanatvam asamavdyi-karanat-vam sva-para-asraya-samaveta-karya-arambhakatvam samana-jatiya-anarambhakatvam dra-vya-anarambhakatvamcprati-niyata-juti-yogituam ig-visista-karya-arambhakatvamc vise-〓hp.290,1l.2-8).(abbreviations and bibliography)vSc: muni sri jambuvijayaji (ed.),yaisesikasutra of kanadd with the commentary of -dranand.s. no.136).baroda: oriental institute,1982.dp. keichi miyamoto (ed.),"The chinese version ofthe dasapadarthiacritical edition," apen-dlix of the hetaphysics ad epistemology of the earby vaisesikas, pune: bhandarkar oriental Re-search institute.1996.Pbh: dvivedined.),the prasastapod bhashya with commentary nyoyakandati of sridhRa,delhi: sri satguru publications. 1984.Bronkhost, j. and Ramseier, y. (ed.)[1994]word index to the prasastapadabhasya, acomplete word index to the printed editions o1prasastapadabhasya, delhi: motilal banarsidass Publishers private limited.Mishra. umesha[1936]conceptioo matter, acordhing to nyay-visesika, delhi (Rep.1987).Mizuno, kogen(水野弘元)[1951]"bukkyo ni okeru shiki (bussitsu) no gainen ni tsuite," ui hakuiu kanreki kinenRonshu. tokyo. iwanami Shoten, publishers.『勝宗十旬義論』大正新脩大藏經第54巻事彙部(下),外教部no.2138.<Key words)vaisesika, rupa, murtatva, matter, realismPart-time lecturer, kanagawa prefectural college of nursing and midwifery, litt.d.
