The  uapanese sSOciation ofIndian and buddhiststudiesSome remarks on gangesa's argumentontoparyIwasakiYoichiIntroduction
lt was originally enunciated by mimamsakas and later accepted by other schools, thatthe words as constituting a valid sentence have to be endowed with three factors-verbalxpectancy akanksa), contiguity (samnidhi), and semantic fitness yogyata).1) Some lat-er navya-nyaya theoreticians add speaker's intentiontotparya) to the list and formulatethat the listener's cognition of the four factors is required for the generation of verbal un-derstanding.
Gangesa (ca.1325,who established the navya-nyaya school, is also sometimes said tobe one of the upholders of this four-factor theory without showing efficient textual evi-lences.) we should, however, be careful about drawing such a conclusion. There are atleast two sections that show his systematic thought on tatparya in the fourth part (sab-dakhanda) of his tattvacintamani (c)-(1)the first chapter (Sabdapramanyavada)where he discusses the role of tatparya in the generation of the verbal understanding  and(2)the fifth chapter (tapparyavada) where he argues on the nature of taparya.4 this pa-per focuses on the problem of how to understand the latter argument properly. althoughthis chapter comes immediately after the examination of the three factors required for theverbal understanding in the second, third and fourth chapters respectively, it does not seemnecessary to interpret it only in this context. aclose look will exhibit its remarkable resem-blance to the argument of his predecessor, udayana(0-11c), who argues on taparya inuis NKus (nyoyakusumaniali) from a different viewpoint. a comparison of their discus-sions on that concept seems to provide us with another way of considering the fifth chapterFirst, I summarize the content of their arguments to show their similarities.
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist StudiesSome Remarkso Gangesa's argumentoatpary y. iwaak1)(59Udayana's argumentudayana argues on tatparya in a section of the fifth chapter of his Nkus.〓 the overallmotive of this treatise is to prove the existence of God isvara).Ina controversy withthose who deny it, particularly the Mimamsa theoreticians (mimamsakas), he employstappary as one of the logical grounds for god's existence. the following shows the out-line of his argument, as I understand them from his concise descriptions.The iniunctive (vidhi) and prohibitive sentences (nisedha) of the veda are acknowl-edged to be meaningful because they urge the listeners to make efforts to acquire or aban-don the things prescribed or prohibited. The veda, however, also contains explanatory sen.tences (arthavada) that neither command nor prohibit anything, but merely express thepraise or censure of something. tatparyya has to be resorted to in order to explain that sucsentences are also meaningful. In view of the commonly observed fact that people makeefforts to acquire the things praised or to abandon the things censured, it stands to reasorthat the explanatory sentences should retain their meaningfulness by appealing to the intention (tatparya), with which people are expected to take positive or negative action in ac-cordance with their messages.what is the totparya, then? first udayana analyzes the word tatparya etymologically asa derivative of the bahuvrihi compound tt-para' (having it as the ultimate), and then ex-amines the nature of the concept by raising the question what the para (intended thing')in the compound tatpara means. he offers four alternatives (see tablel)as possible an-Swers.
let us leave out the first and second alternatives because they have little relevance to thematter in question. The third one is purpose" (proyojama). if the intended thing' meanssomebody's 〓purpose" behind the utterance, we have to consider whose "purpose" it is. butit can neither be the purpose of the listener nor the speaker. The former option is reiectedbecause the listener is not acknowledged to determine the reliability (pramanya) or the in-tended meaning of an utterance. For the latter, udayana simply states that the veda has nospeaker (namely, the author).This statement may sound somewhat strange, because thethesis that the veda has no author is accepted only by the Mimamsakas. asa nyava theore-tician(naiyayika), udayana could never support it. The only possible reason for thisstatement seems to be that he deliberately bases his argument on the opponents' premise sc
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSthat he can establish the existence of godeven from their standpoint.The fourth altemnative is "referent' (uddesya). udayana proposes this alternative sepa-rately fromprayojanq probably because it may denote the impersonal intention of thewords themselves so that it would be acceptable to the opponent who denies the existenceof the speaker to the veda. but udayana, after analyzing this concept in the context of ourcommon linguistic perfomance, ultimately concludes that the "reference' is nothing butthe purport or intentionabhiproya, bhova, or asaya), which presupposes a speaker as theagent. consequently, the fourth altemative is only offered for the sake of an argument withthe opposing proponent of the apauruseyatua of the veda. according to udayana, it is sub-stantially the same with the third one because both must finally be interpreted as the speak-er's intention.He thus concludes that the nature of tatparya is nothing but the speaker's intention, androves the existence of Godon the ground that he is required as the speaker (namely, theauthor) of the veda.Gangesa's argumentThe fourth part of TC is devoted to the discussion on the nature and functions of words(sabda) as atype of the sources of knowledge (pramana). Gangesa establishes that verbalexpressions are independent sources of knowledge in its first chapter,  and then definesand describes each of the three factors-akanksa, yogyata, and dsatti.8 he subsequentlycommences his argument on totparya.In the section of tatparya, gangesa takes up the question what the tutparya is and showssix alternatives. The sixth one (tatprayojanakatva) is interpreted in three ways and headopts the third inteppretation as what rightly explains the nature of tatparya. it should beremembered here that udayana asks what the para is and gives four altematives. Three outof the four are also mentioned by Gangesa and their correspondence can be illustrated byTable l. Gangesa is quite likely to depend largely on udayana's argumentin this section.Nevertheless, there are some ddifferences between them. For instance, gangesa insertsthe third and fourth altemnatives and refines the argument. The most remarkable differencemay be that Gangesa, without mentioning the referent' (〓), adopts the one rejected byudayana (iib) as his conclusion, but this does not imply a fundamental discrepancy. wehave seen that udayana's iiib is not substantially different fromiv. Since udayana's iilb
The  uapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhistStudiesTable1
corresponds to gangesa's 6c, there can be no fundamental difference between their conclu-s0ns.
It should be asked here why Gangesa did not reject 6c (speaker's 'purpose").we carconjecture as follows. while udayana seems to clearly set mimamsakas as the opponentsthroughout his argument, the figure of the opponent is not explicit in the present section ofTC. The contextof Tc does not force gangesa to employ the dialectical technique udaya-na resorts to. Perhaps on this account he does not follow the strategy of the predecesso1and adopts oc as his conclusive view.after thus settling the nature of totparya, gangesa asserts that the veda has the author onthe same ground as that of udayana and then begins the extensive discussions on scrip-tures.
Conclusion
we have seen above the close resemblance of Gangesa's arguments on tatpary' to thatof udayana. both of them use the conclusion of the argument for the purpose of establish-ing the existence of the author of the veda. the content of their arguments also shows greatsimilarities. based on this comparative investigation, we may safely say that Gangesa's ar-gument on tatparya is largely modeled on that of udayana. we have thus obtained anotherpiece of evidence that shows the influence of udayana, particularly of his Nkus, on theformation of Gangesa's linguistic theories.〓The close connection between Gangesa and udayana would warrant reading Gangesa'sargument in the context of the discussions on scriptures rather than or in addition to the
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiescontext of the four-factor theory, since udayana argues on totparya in the former context.The consideration made in this paper, however, does not lead us to conclude that he disre-gards the importance of knowing fotpary in the generation of verbal understanding. toscrutinize how he incorporates totparya into his theory of verbal understanding, it is neces-sary to see, as i mentioned in the introduction, the passages where gangesa discusses therole of tatparya along with those of the other three factors. These passages should be stud-ied carefully because they contain a different definition of tatparya from what we haveseen above, and also show a contradiction to his conclusion made in the first part of ths[C.10) further researches on them would help us resolve the present issue.Notes:
1)for a historical survey of the theory of these factors, see k.k. Raja, indian theories ofteaning, 2nd edition,1969(reprint:20,chennai),pp.149-187.2)cf. k.k. Raja,"Tatparya as a separate vrtti," proceedings and transactions of the all-india oriental conferenceTwentieth Session, pp.319-332, v.p. bhatta, gadodhara's saktivada, vol.1,1994, delhi, p.102,3)TcIv-1pp.170-182.4)TcIv-1pp.319-328.5)prof. tatacharyahas already reported that gaigesa's argument is a reproductionnuvada) of udayana's, but here iake the study one step further by analyzing the details and their differences as well. cf. n.S.r.Tatacharya, sabdabodhamimamsa, pt.1,New delhi,2005,pp.476479.6)Nkupp.51522,9.7)Tciv-1pp.1-1848)tc〓v-1pp.18-318.9)thisinfuence has been elucidated with respect to the chapter on vidhiinh. Manui, "what prompts peo-ple to follow injunctions elucidation of the correlative stnucture of intempretations of vidhi andtheories of action," acta asiatica, vol.57,1989,and to the tkhyatartha chapterinT. wada, "gangesaon the meaning of verbal Suffixes(1),"exypanding ad merging horizons, k. preisendanz (ed),vienna, 2007.i have also dealt with the chapters on sabdapramanya and yogyata in other papers.10)cf. tcPp.12,12-20.Abbreviations:Nkus: nyoyakusumaniali of udayana, p. upadhyaya and d. Sastri (ed.), kSS30,varanasi,1957Tc: tattacintamani of Gangesa, k. tarkavagish (ed.), 6 vols., delhi,1990(rep.). tcP sabda-cintamaniprakasa of Rucidatta, S. Saha andP.k. Mukhopadhyay (ed.), calcutta,1991.(key words)udayana, gangesa, sabda, taparya, navya-nyaya(Graduate student, university of tokyo, jSPS Research Fellow (dc1))
