The  uapaneSe sSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe beginning:The First chapter of the suvarnaprabhosaSuzuki Takayasu1.The aimof This Paper acontinuous verification ofthe hypothesisThe present author has proposed and verified the following hypothesis1 about the inten-ions ofthe compilers ofthe suvarnaprabhasa (Sutra of goldenlight, 〓u<The hypothesis) owing to the account of the swv which has, through the several stages of itsformation, collected and demonstrated the various kinds of doctrines and rites already expounded irother treatises, the compilers and the proponents of the suy became more able to lead their daily re-ligious lives in accordance with "the teaching of [Mahayana] buddhism." we can therefore inter-pret the features appearing in the suv not as a token of " the assimilation of buddhism into hindu-ism" or " the depravity of buddhism," but as an attempt of buddhists to survive in the Indianreligious world by emphasizing the value, the usefulness, and the completeness of [Mahayana)Buddhism under the circumstances where hinduism had become more and more dominant ove1Buddhism (during and after the gupta period). Moreover, if one of the intentions of the compilersofthe uy lay in this attempt by collecting as many doctrines and nites as possible from the stage ofthe fommation of the suc, to that of the su,consistently, we can suppose that the intention of thecompilers remained unchanged all through the stages of the formation of the suv. Furthermore, itmay turn out that the suvis not "a mere miscellaneous medley of doctrines and rites," but a collec-ion of them which is intrinsic to the value of the swvuzuki [200]has provided the most recent study on this subject, and the followingtentative conclusion has been reached:Buddhism had once stood foremost in the religious world of india under the patronage of thegreat kings such as king asoka of the maurya empire and king kaniska of the kushan empire.lowever during and after the gupta period when the snv was compiled, buddhism had already los1its dominant position to Hinduism.under such circumstances, in order to survive in the indian religious world by obtaining variouskinds of aid from the kings as well as their people, the compilers of the suv edited such chapters as"the Five chapters" whose subject is to attain mundane merits. in editing them they introduced alot of features which had been rather unusual for the buddhist scriptures before. but the compilers
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesof the suv succeeded in introducing those features without having disturbed the traditional idea o.deviated from the orthodox fommula of buddhism since the attainment of supreme enlightenment bsthe buddha sakyamuni is, in accordance with the buddhist tradition, inseparably linked to the welfare of all sentient beings in the suv. here may lie one of the reasons why the suv has remained aBuddhist scripture through all the stages of its fommation and transmission, however much the com-pilers of the snv emphasized the attainment of mundane merits, and however many features theyintroduced into the smv which had been rather unusual for the buddhist scriptures at that timeThis paper continues to verify <the hypothesis) by examining the nidana-parivarta(Introductory chapter, chapter l of the 〓)located at the beginning of the suv. thisNiduna-parivarta was enlarged through approximately two stages of formationsuvc/, suvs, suvr, suvc2 (the first stage)r, suc3 (the second and last stage)In addition to the verifying of <the hypothesis>, this paper also attempts to detemminethe origin of the enlarged part and to investigate the reason for the enlargement.2.aSurvey ofthe Nvidana-parivarta"Thus have i heard.".This is the opening of the suv. while the account of the seconcstage is prose 〓i heard at one time (how) the lord at the top of mount Grdhrakuta situat-edin rajagrha dwelled [through meditation] in the very pure and profound sphere of theLaw in the excellent Tathagata-region together with great assembly of ninety eight thou-sand monks." suvr2185.1-5, su,7-9),that of the first stage is verse (〓i heard atone time (how) the tathagata on mount grdhrakuta dwelled in the sphere of the law inthe profound buddha-region. among purified, pure, and best bodhisattvas.") uvSuvc,
335b6-8,suvs1.-14,u,9-15,suvc,359c17-19).Monks (only in the second stage):Those ninety eight thousand monks headed by ain-atakaundinya have a lot of virtue as great arhats. They rose from meditation in the eve-ning, and came where the lord was. having worshipped the feet of the lord with theirheads, they three times walked round the lord towards right and sat down on one side.(suvr218.5-24, Suv,-0)Bodhisattvas (onlyin the second stage)There were also a trillion bodhisattvas head-ed by apratihatadharmacakravartana. all of them have a lot of great virtue such as beingskillful in expounding the real meaning of the buddha's profound teaching. They rose frommeditation in the evening, and came where the lord was. having worshipped the feet ofthe lord with their heads, they three times walked round the lord towards right and sat
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiesdown on one side (ur,185.25-188.6,su,1-b28)Licchavi princes (only in the second stage):There were also five hundred and eightthousand Licchavi princes headed by simhaprabha. They gathered in the evening wherethe lord was. having worshipped the feet of the Lord with their heads, they three timeswalked round the lord towards right and sat downon one side (r288.7-19,suvc〓03b28-c6)
divine sons (only in the second stage):There were also forty-two thousand divinesons headed by priyadarsana. They gathered in the evening where the lord was. havingworshipped the feet of the lord with their heads, they three times walked round the lordlowards right and sat downon one side (Suvr,188.20-30,sm,7-12Naga-kings (only in the second stage)there were also twenty-eight thousand naga-kings headed by padma. They gathered in the evening where the Lord was. having wor-shipped the feet of the lord with their heads, they three times walked round the lord to.wards right and sat downon one side (Sur,188.31-189.7,suvc33c3-18)Yaksa-kings (only in the second stage)There were also thirty-six thousand Yaksa-kings headed by vaisravana. They gathered in the evening where the Lord was. havingworshipped the feet of the lord with their heads, they three times walked round the lordtowards right and sat downon one side (89.8-18,su19-25)Various kinds of sentient beings (only in the second stage) : There were also forty-nine thousand Garuda-kings headed by Gandhahastiprabhavaraja. Moreover there wereGandharvas, asuras, kimnaras, Mahoragas, gods dwelling in mountains, forests, rivers,and oceans, kings, their families, noble sons and daughters of good families, andso on.allof them gathered in the evening where the lord was. having worshipped the feet of theLord with their heads, they three times walked round the lord towards right and sat downon one side (Suvr2189.19-31,suv26-403)Entreaty for preaching (only in the second stage):The assemblies united their mindsand made the respectful gesture with their hands towards the lord. and they entreated theLord to preach who was still in his meditation. (u,189.32-1903, su3-5)Approval ofpreaching (onlyin the second stage): then the lord rose from his medi-tation and started his preach composed of twenty-three verses. The contents of these verseslave remain unchangedsince the first stage. (Suvr219-6, suvc3-7)verse l and2"i will preach the suv, emperor of sutras (sutrardjendra), very profound
The japaneSe sSociation of Indian and Buddhist Studieson hearing and profound on examination. it has been blessed by the buddhas in the fouldirections." (uyc,5b9-13, suvs-5, suv,36-4.8,suvc,359c19-23,su8-13)
verse 3 and order to ruin all evils I will proclaim this blessing, the excellent, aus-picious confessionesana) [named the su]which produces the destruction of all evilsconfers evety blessing, ruins every misfortune, becomes the basis ofomniscience (sarva-inatattva), and is thoroughly adomed with every splendor." (uvc,35b13-17,smvs2-9,s6,suvc,359c24-27,s,-17)verse 5-10"Those beings whose senses are defective, whose life is expended. beset bmisfortune, neglected by the gods, hated by dear, beloved people, tommented by the destruction of their property, in the violent grip of demons, and tortured by evil dreams fullof grief and trouble, should listen to this excellent sutra (sutram uttamam), the profoundBuddha-region buddhagocara) after having purified their bodies and minds. Such mostsevere misfortunes are forever extinguished by the splendor of the suv."(Suvc,5b17-25,sus3.8,Su75.12,suv359c28-360a6, su29)verse11-1"such gods, goddesses, and deities as Lokapala, Sarasvati, Nairanianavas-ini, hariti, drdha, brahmendra, tridasendra, Naga-kings, kimnara-kings, asura-kings, andGaruda-kings will always provide protection nearby for those who hear the suv."(Suvc.33525-c3,suvs3-4.2,su53-28,Suv,367-13,Su1-8)verse 15i will make known the suv, the profound buddha-region, the secret (r-hasya) of all the buddhas, difficult to obtain for millions of aeons." (uvc,33-5, suvs〓3-4, s1-4,uvc2360a13-15,suv3b9-10)verse 16-19those who hear the suv, those who cause others to hear the Suv and re.joice in it, and those who honor the suv, will be honored throughout numerous millions otaeons by various kinds of deities. inconceivable heap of merit will arise for those beingswho have performed merits such as hearing the suv, causing others to hear the suy and re-joicing in it, and honoring the smv. they will be gladly accepted by the buddhas and theBodhisattvas in the ten directions." (uvc,3-10,suvs-12,s-20,u360a15-20,s,11-18)verse 20-22having purifled [your] mind and body, do honor and hear this excellentsutra (sutram uttamam). Those who hear the uy will be able to be reborn as human be-ings and live a good life." (suvc,3510-14, Suvs-5.3,suv7,suvc2
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieS360a21-2,Sv41-24)verse23"Those into whose ear this confession [named the S] enters will have theirmerit-roots ripened and be praisedby numerous buddhas."(suvc,4-15,suvs4-5,S,,suvc,360a25-26,s,25-26)3.nxamination of the nidana-parivaria3.1.The intention of the compilers of the suy described in the nidona-pari-Vortq
let us now look at the accounts common both in the first stage and in the second stage,that is, those of the twenty-three verses, in detail to investigate the intention of the compilers of the suv.The examination of the accounts peculiar to the second stage will be takenup in the next section3.2).The first point to notice is that these six verses (verse 1, 3,8,9,15,and21), which aremore than a quarter of all the twenty-three verses, repeat that the suv is excellent, pro-found, and difficult to obtain. These accounts must serve to emphasize the value, the use-fulness, and the preciousness of the suv.This "precious" suv is said in this chapter l to produce various kinds of merits. Theways to obtain these merits are to hear the suy(verse8,9,16,21,22,and23),to hono1the suv(verse 16and20),and to cause others to hear the suvand rejoice init (verse 16)and such severe practices peculiar to monks as performing sixperfections throughout nu-merous millions of aeons are never referred to in this chapter 1.Moreover, the merits obtained through the hearing of the suv, the honoring of the suvand so on, are the destruction of all evils and the acquisition of every blessing (verse3).the extinguishment of a lot of kinds of severe misfortunes (verse5-10), the protection bythe various kinds of gods, goddesses, and deities (verse11-14),to be honored throughoutnumerous millions of aeons by the various kinds of deities (verse 17),the acquisition ofinconceivable heap of merit (verse 18),to be gladly accepted by the buddhas and the bo-dhisattvas in the ten directions (verse19),to be rebomn as human beings and live a goodlife (verse 22),and the ripeness of merit-roots and the praise by numerous buddhas(verse23).it is obvious that almost all these merits are not supermundane but mundaneones. taking " the ways of obtaining these merits"" and " the characteristics of these merits"into consideration, we can say that hearers expected in the nidana-parivarta are not monks
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesThe beginning: The first chapter ofthe suvarnaprabhasa(T. suzuk1)(10but lay people.if lay people want to obtain various kinds of mundane merits by hearing, honoring, andcausing others to hear the precious swv, they must approach places where the suv is andwhere the monks reside who hold and preach the Suv, and ask the monks to preach theSnpor to exhibit the copies of the suv. naturally enough, there can take place the ex-change of preaching the suv or the exhibition of the suv(from the monks to the lay peo-ple) for offerings ( from the lay people to the monks),and these offerings will support asfinancial aid the religious practices and the lives of the monks.To sum up,
(1)The compilers of the swv attempt to emphasize the value of the suvby repeating that the suvisexcellent, profound, and difficult to obtain(2)the chief ways to obtain various kinds of merits are the hearing of the suv, and so on. nosevere practice peculiar to monks is required.(3)almost all the merits to be obtained are not supenmundane but mundane ones.(4)fFrom(2) and (3),the hearers ofthe suv are supposed to be lay people.〔5)if lay people want to hear the precious smv, they must ask those monks who hold the smvtcpreach it. in that case there will naturally take place the exchange of preaching the u(frorhe monks to the lay people) for offerings ( from the lay people to the monks).These five points have been made clear. as has been shown in the previous studies,8these characteristics are also shared by other chapters in the suv. Therefore it follows whathas been said that the intention of the compilers of the suv that " under circumstanceswhere buddhism had already lost its dominant position to hinduism, the compilers of thesuv, by obtaining various kinds of aid from lay people, must have attempted to survive inthe religious world for the sake of accomplishing the duties of the buddhist clergy" is alsoexpressed in the nidana-parivarto which has been located at the beginning of the suvhroughout the stages of its formation. we can say that this fact also justifles the proposed(hypothesis>.3.2.The origin ofthe enlarged part and the Reason for the enlargemen13.2.1.The Reason for the enlargementBased on the examinationin3.1which made clear that the accounts in the nidana-pari-varta are well accordant with (the hypothesis>, let us examine in this 3.2.1the reason forthe enlargement paying special attention to the point showninthe hypothesis) that " the
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe beginning: The First chapter ofthe suvarnaprabhasa(T. suzuki)compilers of the Suv attempted to emphasize its completeness.""comparing the differences between the accounts in the frst stage and those inthe secondstage, we can notice that the chief aim of the enlargement of the nidana-parivarta lies informing the suv more properly as sutra literature, rather than in enriching its content. Thissupports the idea above mentioned that " the compilers of the suv attempted to emphasizeits completeness."3.2.2.tThe origin of the enlarged partas far as Iknow, there exists only one buddhist scripture that has a similar structure andcontent to the enlarged partin chapter l of the suv. it is the mahameghasutra (S).9The enlarged part in the nidana-parivarta of the suy(r,1851-189.31,su7-404a3),though partly simplified, well corresponds to a series of descriptions in chapter l〓ha thams cd 'us pzes bya ste phun po o'i le'u,大雲初分大衆健度第一(dayun chu fen zhong jian du di yi))of the m(Msr1-133a2,m07717-1080c26)
As has been already proved in the previous studies,10 the umS was a single sourcefrom which chapter of the suv(tathagatoyuhpramananirdesa-parivarta) quotes longseries ofpassages. in other words, the compilers of the suy had referred to the mnSinen-larging chapter  ofthe suv. in the light ofthese two factors, that is, the high similarity ofstructure and content, and the circumstance under which chapter 2of the suvwas en-larged, it is reasonable to consider that the origin of the enlarged part in the nidana-pari-varta is also the nMi. This consideration also serves to strengthen the validity of (theHypothesis> which insists that in order to emphasize the completeness of the suv its com-pilers have consistently collected the various kinds of doctrines already expounded in othertreatises.
4.conclusion
Under circumstances where buddhism was declining, the compilers of the suv,by ob-taining various kinds of aid from lay people, must have attempted to survive in the reli-gious world for the sake of accomplishing the duties of the buddhist clergy. They enlargedvarious times the suyin order to emphasize its value, usefulness, and completeness, withtheir intention expressed in chapter l which has been located at the beginning of the suv
The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSThe beginning: the First chapter of the suvarnaprabhasaT. Suzuki)(111throughout the stages of its formation.In the enlargement of chapter l, their chief object was likely to form it more properly assutra literature. the origin of the enlarged part is thought to be the mahameghasutra whichwas also referred to in the enlargement of chapter 2.Notes:
1)suzuki, t.[1996] The uahameghasutra as an origin ofan intetpolated part of the presenSwvarnaprabhasa, jjournalof indiam ad buddhist studies 89(45-1),pp.28-30, Suzuki, T.〔1999]mutual influence among the mahayana sutras concerning SarvalokapriyadarsanaJjournalofindiam ad buddhist studties94(47-2),pp.101, Suzuki,t. [203]stipa worshirand dharma evaluation in the suvarnaprabhasa, journalof indicm ad budmhist studies12(51-2),pp.32-36,suzuki, t. [2004]rites and buddhismperspective from the sarcsvatiparivaria in the suvarnaprabhasa, journalofindian ad buddhist studies 1(52-2),pp.12-17;suzuki, t. [2005] The unchanged intention of the compilers of the suvarnaprabhasa anExamination through the verification of the hypothesis on "the independence of [Mahayana.Buddhism," journalof indiund buddhhist studies 1(3-2),pp.-26, suzuki, t. [26The primary introduction of the Rites for good Fortune into the suvarnaprabhasa described inthe sri-parivarta, jjournal of indim d buddhist studies 1054-3),pp.42-50, suzuki, t.[〓007]aintention of the compilers of the suvarnaprabhsxpressed and intimated in thedrdha-paripario, journal of indiam ad buddhist studies112(55-3),pp.72,suzuki, t.[2008]the characteristics of "the five chapters on the various Gods and goddesses" in thesuvarmaprabhasa, journal of indiam ad buddhist studies 11(56-3),pp.66-73; Suzuki, t,[2009]the attainment of Supreme Enlightenment through the offerings Represented in thesuvarnaprabhasa, jjournal of indicm ad buddhist studies 1157-3),pp.78-86, Suzuki, T.[20linking the buddha's attainment of supreme Enlightenment to the welfare of beings inthe suparnaprabhasa, journl of indic ad buddhisf studies21(58-3),pp.-70ansuzuki [1998a,1998b,1998c,1999a,200a andbinjapanese.2)<Texts and abbreviations>〓uysuvarnaprabhasa or suvarna[-pra-]j bhasottamasutrendrarajia.Svc
w1c,金光明經四卷(jin guang ming jing si juan),tr.曇無識(tan-wi chen).t.No.663.
Suvssuvarnabhusottamnasitra, ed. J. nobel, leipzig,1937.sur
sur) phgs pgser 'od dmpa mdo sde 'i dpo'i rgypie byaba theg p chenpo'mdo, arya-suuarnaprabhasottamasutrendrarojic-huma-mahoyana-sutra, tr. unknown.Pno.176.
Suvc
〓合部金光明經八卷(he bu jin guang ming jing ba juan), combined by實貴(Bao-gui).T. No.664.〓1 phgs p gser od d md sde 'i dr h thegp cheno
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesmdo, arya-suvarnaprabhasottamasutrendrarojia-nama-mahayana-sutra, tr. jinamitra,Svc,
Silendrabodhi and Ye ses sde. Pno.175.1金光明最勝王經十卷(jin guang ming zui sheng wang jing shi juan),tr.義淨(Yi-jing).t. No.665.Suvr suvarnaprabhasottamasutra, ed. J. nobel, leiden,1944.(T. taisho tripitaka, p peking kanjur)3)The present author calls the set of the five successive chapters consisting of the caturmahara-ja-parivarta (see suzuki [2005]),the Sarasvati-parivaria (see suzuki [200]),the sri.parivari (see suzuki [2006]),the drdha-parivaria (see suzuki [2007]),and the saminaya-parivart (see suzuki [28]), "the five chapters on the various Gods and goddesses"" or forshort "the five chapters," which tells of the various merits granted to the proponents of the smvby the various gods and goddesses.4)suvc,b3-c15(序品第一(xu pi di yi)),suvs11-5.(nidana-parivarta);sur,3-7.12(glen gzi'i le'u);suvc2 35c14-3602uvcl, xu pi di yi),suvr2185.0-190.7,〓.17-7.12(Glen gii'ile'u),u,4-404b26upidi yi).5)only the suvs has short sentences which were inserted later (uvs1.7-13).6)translations from the suvs (either full or summarized) are mainly basedon emmerick [1996.(The straof golelight. beintranslationof the suvarnabhasottamasutra, pts).7)the previous studies listed inn.l illustrate that the suv was held and preached by monks orpreachers who belonged to buddhist monasteries.8)See the previous studies listed in n.1.リ)〓sphgs psprin chenpoies bya ba thegpa chenpo'i mdo, arya-mahamegha-nama-mahoyana-sutra, tr. Surendrabodhi and Ye ses sde. Pno.898.msc大方等無想經六卷(da fang deng wi xiang jimng liu juan), tr.曇無識(tan-wiChen).T. No.387.It must be noted that both the mc and the suc, were rendered by the same translator,Dharmaksema (tan-wi chen)10)See suzuki [1996,1998a,1998b,1998c,1999,and1999a]<key words)金光明最勝王經・金光明經(suwarna[-pra-]bhasottamasitrendrarojia),序品(nidana-parivaria), The intention of the compilers of the suvarnaprabhasa.professor, yamaguchi prefectural university, d.litt.)
