The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSOn the collation of taisho Tripitaka: a case ooshuo〓ann shouyi jing t602HuNG hung-lungIntroduction
The compilation of dai nihon kotei shukusatsu di zokyo大日本校訂縮刷大藏經1(abbreviated as toko edition) was originally based on the version of koryo taejanggyong高麗大藏經(abbreviated as koryo), then collated with the song edition, zi fu zang資福藏(abbreviated as song),the mueition, pu ning zang普寧藏(abbreviated as yuan)and the ming edition, bei zang北藏(abbreviated as hing) to finalize the compilations.on the other hand, the compilation of the version of taisho shinshu dizokyo大正新脩大藏經(abbreviated as taisho) was also based on koryo, then collated against the Song,the yuan, the ming edition, obakuzo黄檗藏(abbreviated as mfing),)the old sog edi-tion宮本3)(abbreviated as old-song),the shogo-z0聖語藏4)and the other editions tofinalize the compilations. but after compiling the collations, how much creditability canthe taisho and tokyedtition achieve ?〓oshuomn shouyijjing t02The main purpose of this essay is to compare the 〓0collations found in the first andsecond volumes of T62foshuo shouyi jing佛説大安般守意經2)(hereafter〓bSYj)itaisho with the corresponding collations foundin kyo edition, to reviewthe issues relating to the collations of taisho. after comparing the collations finished byTuisho and tokyo etition for -abSYj, we find that:Group a: There are a total of1collations in koryo which are identical to their counter-parts in the song, the yuem and the ming, but they are different from the ones in the old-Song.
Group b. on the other hand, if we ignore any collations between koryo and the ol-Song, and only tally the collations conducted between koryo and any edition of the song,
The uapaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhist studieSthe yucn or the ming. we find that the number ofthese collations are 161This means that after ignoring the taisho collations with the old songs part, the con.tents of the 161collations in tuisho are identical to the counterpart contents that found inTokyo edition. combining the 161collations from group b and the1collations fromGroup aas mentioned above, there are a total of175collations that are identical betweenthe two editions of taisho and tokyo. in other words, if we remnove the collations from theold-song, out of the 〓0collations in aisho,175collations are identical to the ones foundi tokyo edition, which means 85%,almost90%of the collations are consistent with eachother between these two versions.collationsin Taisho derived from tokyoeditionasa matter of fact, itis mentionedicmparison researchoershiwuzhong zangiingmulu duizhao kaoshi二十五種藏經目録對照考釋"that the collations in taisho are de-rived fromokyo edition. This research also supports the credibility of suchan argument.If we leave aside the aforementioned175identical collations. there are the other2col-lations which are inconsistent with each other between taisho and Tokvo edition. withirthe 25collations, there are 9 mistaken collations found, where taisho quoted the collationsfrom tokyo edition unmodified. This demonstrates that while quoting the collations fromTokyo edition, the editor of taisho did not proofread the collations one by one. however,at the same time, we also fnd that Taisho has corrected 8 errors in the collations quotedfrom tokyo edition. in any event, the editor of Taisho quoted the original collations direct-ly from tokyo edition and did not carefully check the errors there. as a result, taisho ad.opted 9 collation errors which are the originalmistakes of the tokyo edition.Taisho rectifed5%collation errors from okvo editionas mentioned above, taisho also rectified another 8 collation errors that are derived fromTokyo edition. as far as Taisho is concerned, it directly adopted 9 collation errors from to-kyo edition but rectified another 8 collation errors, an almost l to l ratio. This indicatesthat while quoting the collations fromtokyo edition, the editor of Taisho only rectifiled halfof the errors, not every one of them. what's more, four correct collations from tokvo edi-tion were quoted incorrectly by taisho , this is probably caused by negligence during theprocess of transcribing andproofreading, due to human-error
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesFurthermore, there are three collations i taisho where the versions of the song, theYucm or the hting are all different from the ones in koryo, the master copy of Taisho t-tion. These three collations are not foundin tokyo edition. That is to say, these three colla-tions, no matter they are in kory the master copy of tokyo edition), the song, the yuamor the ming, are all identical to each other. This clearly indicates that the version of koryoused as the master copy of tokyo etition is different from the version of koyo which isused as the master copy of tuisho; the fommer is a partially collated one. The problem oftranscribing errors still persists through the process of proofreading among different ver-ions, e.g. the wordof"耳"inkoryo is transcribed as "hu互"itaisho, andis transcribedas "ya牙"itokvo edition.Table l: among the collations adopted by tuisho from tokyo edition, there are nine er-rors due to a failure to double-check.The collationinokedition is correctThe collation textinokyo edition shows "yi tong zuo yi已同作以."The meaning ishat the word "yi巳"is parallel with the word "yi以."but no other edition here showswhich texts are to be used to proofread with okydition. but according to the preced-ing contents of the collation no.5, the proofread texts will be the yuam and the mfing.ltis obvious that while conducting the collation, the editor of taisho has referred to thecollations fnished by toko edtition. but thev did not double check if these collations areactually collated with the yucn and hfing. The editor iust arbitrarily concluded that it hasalready been collated with the song, the yuan and the ming. This is how this kind of errordue to negligence by the editor of tokyo edition, there is no collation for this annotation. The collation finished by taisho has only been collated with the od-song. obvious-v. the editor of Taisho found that there was no collation regarding this annotationin-p〓o etition, therefore the editor only collated it with the old-song. This resulted in the)mission of the song as an additional source for collating this annotation.Here "the word "chi持"is the same as the word "dai待",mentioned tokyo etition iswhile conducting the collation, the editor of Taisho quoted the collation directly frompokuo edition, plus the collation finished by the 〓ld-song, but the editor did not make uphe omission of failing to refer to the hting by tokyoedtition.This demonstrates that the errors found in taisho are due to direct quoting the colla-
The  uapaneSe sSOciationofIndian and buddhiststudiesThe editor of Tokyo ediiion did not collate this annotation.The editor of taisho only collated this annotation with the old-song since no relatedollation is available for reference in okyo edition. The editor of Taisho did not collatethis annotation with other editions either. but in fact. this annotation should collate withword"已"is the same as"以"defined below.' The editor of taisho only collated this an-notation with the old-song. apparently the song, the yuan and the ming have beenThe annotation已"is the same as〓以",in taisho is only collated with the olt seems that there is no collation regarding this annotationikyoedition.'et there is a sideline on the left side of the word〓已." and if we trace back. we canind that the annotation"已is the same as以,defined below" has already appeared in an-notation, the meaning of "defined below" can be applied to annotation no.186.In any case, after finding no collation regarding this annotation in taisho, the editorfailedto collate this annotation with the song. the yuc and the hiing.Conclusion
after comparing the collations one by one between taisho and tokyo etition, we carfnd that the accuracy rate of the collations finished by tokyo etition almost reached90%。although taisho not only referred to the collations finished by tokyo edition but alsomade use of the collations finished by many other versions, it did not correct all the origi-nal errors from tokyetition, it only conrected half of the errors, i.e., the confidence levelof the collations finished by taisho is 95%.it is not easy for the collations of such a volu-
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesminous taisho to reach%accuracy, but this research does prove that in order toachieve the higher accuracy, reliability of textual criticism, in addition to the version thatwas adopted, human factors such as collating procedure also plays an important role aswell.
Though this research only focused on a single scripture in taisho to arrive at a conclu-sion, and it is still too early to draw any conclusion regarding the overall situation of thecollations in Tisho. the author still believes that this initial conclusion can serve as an in-dicator to a certain degree. For researchers who utilize chinese material as primary re-search data, in addition to referring to the collations finished in taisho, it would be bettelto find out the original versions of those materials to collate with.Notes
1)tokyo edition(small typed),1885.2)as the contents of obakuo黄檗藏are parallel with bei zang北藏,so we abbreviate bothditions as the same 'min edition.'3)this is belonging to the library of the imperial household宮内省圖書寮本.4)This is belonging to the library of the imperial treasure house shoso-in正倉院at nara.〓TNo.602, vol.15. pp.163c-173a.6)〓okyo editionNational diet library of Japan日本國會圖書館),shuku five宿五,pp.69-73.
7)cai yun-chen蔡運辰,shin-wen-feng press.新文豐出版社,taipei,1983,p.539&557.8)annotation numberl (abbreviated as A. No.1)of t.602,p.164.9)a. no. 3 of T.602,p.16410)a. No. 6of T.602,p.165.11)a. no. 5of T.602,p.166.12)a. no.4of T.602,p.167.13)a. no.10of T.602,p.169.14)A. No. 8of T.602,p.170.15)a. No. 9of T.602,p.172.16)a. No.21of T.602,p.172.<Key words> anban Shouyi jing, taisho tripitaka, collations, tokyo editionAssistant Prof., dharma drum buddhist college, taiwan)
