The  uapaneSe sSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesprajnakaragupta's Interpretation of svalaksanaKobayasi hisavasu0.IntroductionAs some scholars have pointed out,1 when dhammakirti says that a valid cognitio(pra-mana) is a cognition which does not deceive our expectation toward its object (avisamvadijnanam), he confronts the following problem: if the buddhist theory of momentarinessclaims that an object-moment to be cognized by a cognition should be differentiated froman obiect-moment to be obtained through a practical activity, how can one establish the va-lidity of the cognition? to solve this problemdharmottara introduces the concept of a"continuum"(santana).According to him, what is to be obtained through a practical ac-tivity on the basis of a cognition is a continuum of moments and not an object-moment.But tosaki(1989:184,n.9)has expressed strong doubts about dharmottara's view. it isobvious that dharmottara's solution is still inconsistent with the buddhist theory of mo-mentariness.
In this paper i shall show that prajnakaragupta has a different strategy for dealing withthe problem.inprajnakaragupta's view, one and the same object-moment can be bothsomething to be cognized by a cognition and something to be obtained through the cogni-tion, that is, what is to be cognized by a cognition is nothing more than an object-momentto be obtained through this cognition.1.svalaksana as the object ofa valid cogmitionAs is well known, dharmakirti holds that, although a object of a valid cognition is ei-ther a particular (svalaksana) or a universal (sumanyalaksana), in the final analysis, onlya particular is an objectofa valid cognition. he says.Pv〓53d-54ab. meymtv ekamsvalaksanm
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiestasmad arthakriyasiddheh sadusattovicaranot〓n the final analysis.] however, the obiect ofa valid cognition (prameya) is a particular (svala-esana) alone, because a person accomplishes his or her aimon the basis of [a particular]. For [ahoughtful person] examines whether or not [a particular] exists."The same view is put forward in his pvin ii also:Pvin8.1-8ata evgpramamyam vastupisayam dvayoh7b)pratyaksanumanayoh, arthakriyayogyavisayatvad vicarasya. sukhaduhkhasadhane jnatva yatha-rhampratipitsovo hi kimcit pariksante preksapurvakarinah, n vysamitayd."Therefore, the validity of the two [types of cognitions], perception and inference, is [to bsjudged] with respect to a real thing vastu). For [a person] examines whether or not [a giventhing] has the capacity to bring about his or her aim. For, after understanding what causes pleasureand [what removes ] pain,  thoughtful persons, wishing to obtain a centain thing answering the in-ended purpose, examine [whether or not it has the capacity to bring about their purpose]. This isnot from their bad habits."4lt is clear from these statements that, when dharmakirti says that a particular or areal thingis the only object of a valid cognition, perceptual or inferential, he intends to imply that anobject-moment to be obtained through a practical activity is an object ofa valid cognition.But how can such an object-moment, which is yet to occur at the time when a valid cogni-tion is taking place, be called meya something to be cognized by the valid cognition?2.Is the obiect to be obtained a continuum?dharmottara, who seems aware of this difficulty, divides an objiect of a valid cognitioninto two types: a direct object (grahya) and an object to be obtained (prapaniya, adhy-avaseya). For perception, the formeris an obiect-moment (i.e., a particular) and the lattelis a continuum (i.e., a " particular"),while for inference, the former is an internal obiect(ie., a universal) and the latter is an external one (i.e., a particular").〓〓 It is important tonote in this connection that the continuum for perception and the external obiect for infer-ence are simply a conceptual construct and hence unrealprajnakaragupta disputes dharmottara's view by saying the following:Pv2,24-27tatsantane pravrttatvat pravrttir iti cet. katham prathamaksanasya santanata. nacanyatra vrttam anyutra wrttam bhovuti. tatha ced anumanam api svarupe wrtiam arihe pi vrtianeva bhanef. upacaramatram etat, na paramurthenetpy api nottaram. prapyaksam api ekatra vrttan
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesanyatrapi wrttam iii nopacarad etadamyat."[objection:] [itcan be said that perception] occurs [with respect to an object-moment to be ob-lained], since [the perception] occurs with respect to a continuum [of object-moments where theobject-moment appears].[answer:] how [could it ever be established that] the first object-moment is acontinuum2 In addi-tion, it is not possible that one and the same perception occurs with respect to different object-mo-ments. if such were the case, it would also follow that one and the same inference occurs with re-pect not only to the inferential cognition itself [i.e., the fire-image appearing to this inferentialcognition] but also toan [extemnal] object [ie., externally existing fire ].[objection:] In the case [of inference], [an intemnal object] is metaphorically called [an 'extemalone ] and not in the true sense of the word.[answer:] This does not constitute an answer, either. the statement made by you that perceptionccurs with respect to one thing [i.e., an object-moment] and to another [ie., a continuum]inothing other thana metaphorical expression."The pointmade by prajnakaragupta is clear. according to him,an object of a valid cogni-tion (meya) should be one.3.The obiect of a valid cognition is a future obiect-momentAccording to prajnakaragupta, an object of a valid cognition is defined as an object-moment yet to occur (bhayin) and this object-moment is the one to be obtained through apractical activity. consider the following statementby prainakaragupta.Pva12-28atha wartamanabhavinor ekatim asaya pravartate. tatha sati bhavyarthavittiievasau, na vartamanavittih.proptya hi vedanasatyatanumiyate. tato vartamanarupasyapropterbhavinas c viparyayad bhauivisayam e pramanam. vartamanabhavas tu s api tatrasapyah.pratyaksamapi bhaviny eapramanam." [objection: ]aperson takes action after judging that a present object-moment (vartamana) andafuture obiect-moment (bhavyartha) are identical with each other.[answer:] ifso, the cognition [on the basis of which the person takes action] is not the one whichognizes a present object-moment but the one which cognizes a future object-moment. For the va-lidity (satyata) of a cognition [of an object-moment] is inferred from the obtainment [of the ob.ject-moment]. even if there is the propetty of being a present object-moment in the [ future object-moment] [because the two object-moments are identified with each other], [this property is]something unreal (asapya). perceptionis also a valid cognition with respect only to a future objectmoment."
ltis important to note here that prajnakaragupta argues that what has a claim to be regardedas an obiect of a valid cognition is just a future object-moment, which is to be obtained
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesthrough a practical activity. clearly, unlike dharmottara he attaches more importance tcwhat is to be obtained through a valid cognition (prapti) than to what is to be grasped byavalid cognition (grahana).4.perception and inference are erroneousBut a question arises: how can a future obiect-moment be an obiect of a valid cognition?For, at the time when a cognition occurs with respect to a present object-moment, a futureobiect-moment will have not occurred. Prainakaragupta fnds a clue for solving this ques-tion in the following statement by dharmakirti.Pviii5-c abhiproyavisamvadad api bhranteh pramanata/gatir pynyatha drstaThe first half of this verse can be rendered as follows.を[Inference], though it is an erroneous cognition, [can be regarded as] a valid cognition since itulfills our expectation."According to prainakaragupta, however, padc admits of three interpretations.pva217,23:anyathopigatir drsta. bhrcntopigatir drsto."[interpretation it is seen that a cognition of [an intended object] occurs evenin a differentmanner, thatis, [anintended object] is cognized even through an erroneous cognition."pva27,23-24aha va gatih pddaviharanam, tadanyathopi pararipena pratipattay api drstu[Interpretatioaltematively, the word gati means taking a step toward [something]'(pa-daviharana).accordingly, the following is meant:] it is seen that, evenifone understands [a cer-tain object] as something different fromit (tadanyathapiararupenapratipattoy api), one take.a step toward [its obtainment]."pva218,2-4… gatir api pratyaksubhimata 'nyatha drsto pararupenaiva. n kcit pravrttivisayesvarupena gatih. anyatratu vasturipe svarupe va gotir ubhoyor apiti bhovivastuni ko visesah.[Interpretationitis seen that even a cognition which is regarded as perception [apprehendsa certain object] just as something different [ from it]anyathrarupenaiva). No cognitionapprehends an obiect toward which one takes action, as suchsvarupena).on the contrary, both[perception and inference] apprehend something different [from such an object]-a real entity[i.e., the first obiect-moment] or a cognition itself. Therefore, what difference is there [betweerperception and inference] with respect to a real entity yetto occur."Let us note the third interpretation. as shown above, inprainakaragupta's view a futureobiect-moment is an obiect of a valid cognition. it is evident that a future object-momentisnot an obiect of the cognition whose obiectis a present obiect-moment. in terms of the fu-ture obiect-moment, however, it can be said that the future obiect-moment has been errone-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesously cognized by the cognition of the present object-moment. it is important to note thathe has stated that the validity of a cognition of an obiect-moment is inferred from the ob-tainment of the object-moment (proptya hi vedanasatyatanumiyate).if the validity of acognition is conditioned by the obtainment of its object, it does not matter if the cognitionis erroneous. what is considered to be the present object-moment is an extemal obiect-mo-ment in the case of perception and an image appearing to a cognition in the case of infer-ence.
5.conclusion
In order to solve the problem of the time-gap between an object-moment to be cognizedand an obiect-moment to be obtained, dharmottara and prainakaragupta propose two dif-ferent solutions. from the point of view of what is to be cognized by a cognition at thetime when the cognition takes place, the former holds that an obiect of a valid cognitionshould be divided into two types: a direct obiect (grahya) and an obiect to be obtained(propaniya, adhyavaseya), while, from the point of view of whatis to be obtained througha cognition, the latter holds that it suffices to say that a cognition of a present obiect-mo-ment is an erroneous cognition with respect to a future object-moment. it is clear thatPrainakaragupta tries to solve the above-mentioned problem within the framework estab-ishedby dharmakirti: prajnakaragupta applies dharmakirti's logic to establish the validityof an inferential cognition to a valid cognition in general.we have the famous phrase of dharmakirti: "cognition itself is known for itself, [but]its validity [is known] through a practical activity (pramanyam vyavaharena)"(pvi〓-5a).as far as the validity of a cognition is concerned, it seems that dharmakirti alsoattaches more importance to what is to be obtained than to what is to be cognized.[wish to express my gratitude to professor brendan S. gillon of Mcgill university who kindlyhelped me improve my english.Notes:1)see shah(167:188-189),tosaki(1989:175-176),katsura (198222-223),etc.2)see also pvSV5,32-46,9and dunne (2004:115,n.98).3)see pvin1776-7,P201-3).4)see pvin177b3,p2008a7).5)See nbT71,1-72,3,oki(1999),arnold (2009),etc.6)paramarihenepy api msb,n  par… zhes bya baryong t, paramarthasatye pi pva.yag t, paramarthasatye pi pva.7)32-4-4).8)vartamana-Msb, da lar bat, pravartamana-pva9)msb,t, ins. prakysta casau vittih va.
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies10)see y1-7).11)See y14517-8).12)see y(D15-61b6-7).Abbreviations: manuscript b of Pva s. watanabe, ed. Patna-narita,1998.nNyayabindutika (dharmottara):d. Malvania, ed. patna,1955.(2nd ed.1971.)pramanavarttikalamkara (prajnakaragupta): r. sankrtyayana, ed. Patna,1953.pvinpramanaviniscaya(dhammakirti):e. Steinkeller, ed. bej ing-vienna,2007.pvinpramanaviniscayatika (dhar-mottara):d4229,p5227.pvVpramanavarttikasvavrtti (Dharmakirti):r. gnoli, ed. Rome.1960pramanavarttikatika adpvi(Ravigupta) : d4225,P5722ibetan translation ofPva: d4221,P5719.pramanavarttikalamkaratika Suparisuddhi (Yamari) :d4226.5723.Amnold, dn)harmakirti and dharmottara on the lntentionality of perception." ud-dhis philosophy: essential readings,186-196,new york: oxford university press. dunne, john(2004)undutions of dharmakirti 's philosophy, boston: wisdompublications. Katsura, Sho-ryu1984)harmakinti's Theory of Tnuth," journalofindihilosophy15-235.oki.Kazufumi(1999)pravrtti asa action ofa person."harmakirti 's thought ad iis impact〓indicm ad tibethilosophy,287-294, vienna: verlag der osterreichischen akademie derwissenshaften. Shah, nagin967)anka 's criticism of dharmakirti 's philosophy,Ahmedabad: l. d. institute of lndology. tosaki, hiromasa(1989)ninshiki."iamami koToyo shiso,160-185,tokyo: iwanami shoten  japanese).<key words prajnakaragupta, dharmottara, prameya, svalaksana, bhavin(Research fellow, tokyo gakugei university, Ph.d.)
