The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesFrom the rissho-ankoku-on to the koimoku-sho: The Issueof the concept of a Spiritual culturein nichiren buddhismWatanabhoyo
1.nichiren's religious propagation and the concept of a spiritual cultureThe rissho-ankoku-ron立正安国論(〓n bringing peace to the nation by establishingthe true dhamma), kaimoku-sho開目抄(treatise oopening the Eyes), kamin-honzon-sho観心本尊抄(object of devotion for observing the Mind), Seni-sho撰時抄(TheSelection ofthe time), and the ho-on-sho報恩抄(on Repaying debts of gratitude), arefive of nichiren's maior works, collectively known as "godoibu"五大部(The Five Maiorwritings).These writings are understood to have each been individually themed. however,while there is considerable speculation regarding the possibility of a core essence withinthese writings, opinions regarding whether the themes of these five major works are independent orinvolve a mutual consistency would most likely be divided.The life of Nichiren日蓮(1222-1282)was tumultuous, which gives reason to wondeiif there could possibly be some cohesive element within the works that differs from whatmight normally be considered as consistency or collectiveness.The kyo-gyo-shin-sho教行信証,amajor piece of work written by Shinran親鸞(1173-1262),ino fascicles, came to the higashi-hongan-ji東本願寺temple from the bando ho-on-ji坂東報恩寺temple. Shinran had compiled a draft called the kyo-gpo-sho during thetime when he lived in the eastemm part of the country. Shinran continuously revised thispiece up until the time of his passing, so it has the aspect of being an unfinished work.1)The sho-bo-gen-z6正法眼蔵,i95fascicles, is the seminal writing of dogen道元(1200-1253).it is a collection of dharma discourses-a great and laborious work span-ning a continuous period of more than twenty years, from1231with the ben-do-wa弁道話until1253 with the hachi-di-nin-gaku八大人覚.2)Nichiren wrote the rissho-ankoku-ron at age 39in1260,the kaimoku-sho in272at age51,the kamiin-honzon-sho Full title: nvorai metsugo go-gohuaku-sai-shi kaniin-honzon-
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studiessho)如来滅後五五百歳始観心本尊抄in1273at age52, the Senii-shoin175at age54,and the ho-o-sho in276at age5.within the turbulence of nichiren's life. these werewritten one after another in light of his self-acknowledgement of being a "practitioner ofthe lotus Sutra法華経の行者."they are thus very different from the structured and or-dered works of Shinran and dogen. actions and behaviors are taken as the background ofthese writings of nichiren, and they are based on this deeply underlying foundation. Thefocal point of my research is to clarify the continuity within these five representative writ-ings of nichiren. particularly, i want to show the thread of continuity that runs through theRissho-ankoku-ron and the kaimoku-sho from such a point of view. although there is agap of twelve years between these two works, within that span occured the " shidi-honan四大法難"-the four major persecutions of nichiren.To summarize the characteristics of the two, the rissho-ankoku-ron is a treatise, con.frontational in its expression, protesting against the conduct of the kamakura shogunate,while the kaimoku-sho is nichiren's treatise of religious introspection-written followingthe hardships he experienced-in which he elucidates his recognition of himself as"nichiren, the practitioner of the lotus Sutra." The rissho-amkoku-ron, with the lotusSutra as its root and the philosophy of buddhism as it background, was nichiren's writtenchallenge, warning of impending crises that would confront society and the nation. Thekaimoku-sho, on the other hand, is rather the inward-looking revelation of a personal pro-file of himself as the lotus Sutra practitioner who is a reincamnation of Superior practiceBodhisattva " jogyo bosatsu上行菩薩."these expositions are two sides of the same coin,and they represent nichiren's ultimate understanding of his religious practices. both writ-ings are understood as treatises on such individual themes. Then. what kind of associatio1can be found here?2.The Rissho-ankoku-fon as the foundation of nichiren's buddhismThe rissho-ankoku-ron is the foundation and starting point of nichiren's buddhism.Nichiren presented the rissho-ankoku-ron to the lay priest hoio tokiyori北条時頼,a for-mer regent of the kamakura shogunate, in july of 1260.tokiyori passed away three yearsafter that, in263,at the young age of thirty-seven. Tokiyori was physically weak and in-firm, and he was devoted to the faith of buddhism, which may have been motivation forNichiren to present the rissho-ankoku-ron to him.
The uapanese asSociationofIndian and buddhiStStudiesThe beginning sentence of the rissho-ankoku-nis."a traveler came to lament: in recent years, strange phenomena in the sky, natural calamities onearth, famines, and epidemics have occurred and spread over all the land of japan. oxen and horseslie dead at crossroads, and the streets are filled with skeletons. a majority of the population haveperished, and everyone has been touched by grief."4The treatise, consisting of ten sections, then proceeds in the form of questions beingasked by a traveler, and answers being given by a master of a household. The beautifulcomposition ofthe beginning of this work is more than mere literary expression. itis basedon calamities that were unprecedented, even in a Japan with a history of continuously oc-cuming natural disasters. The scale of those calamities can be grasped by reading ikEDaShoichiro's nvihon saihenshi.,Given the existence of such natural and social disorders, the question arises. "is Bud-dhism effective against conditions of social crisis?" it is the master's constant role to de-bate and discuss this question, and he goes on to examine the causes of the present crisisfrom the buddhist viewpoint. The kamakura Shogunate ordered temples and shrinesthroughout the entire country to offer prayers as a countermeasure to these crises. butNichiren raises the issue that these prayers didn't have any effect at all. in his opinion, thereason for the failure is that the prayers were offered through" wrong teachings." he insiststhat it is important to confirmThe correct doctrine of the buddha."This posture is consistent throughout nichiren's life. The rissho-ankoku-ron is a treatise〓 spreading peace throughout the country by establishing the true dharma. This was themajor motivating concept of his life, and this treatise was his starting point. in its ninthsection the words, "you should promptly convert from your false faith and take up the trueand sole teaching of the lotus Sutra at once," are the origin of nichiren's philosophy andbehavior. allof his activities on behalf of buddhism were focused on making that proposi-tion clear.
3.why the kaimoku-sho begins with a discussion ofthe doctrine of the "threevirtues""
after nichiren presented the rissho-ankoku-ron at age39i60,he was subjected tofour major persecutions-the shidui honn-that, in large part, came about because ofthat treatise. on the other hand, his concept of himself as the principal practitioner of the
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist StudiesLotus Sutra was strengthened through his experiences during these persecutions. he wrotethe lengthy treatise kaimoku-sho in order to tell his followers, as a kind of last will andtestament, that the lotus Sutra was the very teaching for the salvation of people in the lat-ter age of degeneration appo末法),and to inform them of his self-acknowledgmentas the advocator ofthe lotus Sutra. the title kaimoku-sho (treatise on opening the eyes)means to open one's unseeing eyes in order to free oneself from illusions and distortedviews. Just as the kaniin-honzon-sho is called the ho-kai-ken法開顕(commentary on theDharma), the kaimoku-sho is thus similarly called nin-kai-ken人開顕(commentary onthe people).The latter half of this treatise talks of the realization of the lotus Sutra'sMiraiki未来記("prediction" -the foretelling of future events in sutras or other writings)and the recognition of its mission, which is to save the people of the confused age of〓appo.
right at the beginning ofthe kaimoku-sho, and prior to making it immediately clear thathe considers himself to be the foremost practitioner of the lotus Sutra in all of japanNichiren asserts that there are three virtues三徳that all human beings should respect: thevirtue of being a leader主徳,the vintue of being a teacher師徳,and the virtue of being a)arent親徳.the description of the treatise as a commentary on human beings is relevant,ince its principal substance is the concept that to understand and to be conscious of bud.dhism is to understand and be conscious of one's own being. but why did nichiren firsttake up a discussion ofthree vintues? when the reason for that is made clear, one can graspthe connection between the rissho-ankoku-ron andthe kaimoku-sho.These three virtues were illustrated in the ichidoizoii-z一代五時図and the ichidaigoii-keizu一代五時鶏図(showa-teihonnichiren shoinun vol.3,all four volumes). oneaspect of buddhism, since its inception, is engagementin the ultimate state of mind in deepreflection and meditationmadhi), and this aspect is also shown in the lotus Sutra(chapter two, expedients for example, begins with the buddha emerging from his samadhilo speak to sariputra).8 The lotus Sutra furthermore transmits the idea of sharing it teach-ings in the community and in the nation, and it expounds to the people the concrete rele-vance of practice in life. Zhiyi智〓(538-597)made clear the lotus sutra's philosophywith regardto buddhism and how it is to be practiced. Zhanran湛然(711-782),a succes-sor to and great advocate of Zhiyi's teachings, intensively studied the three virtues of lead-er, teacher, and parent. he made clear his conclusion that, when thinking in terms of philo-
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist studiessophical culture, the eternal buddha historically holds the highest rank in personifyingthose virtues.with this theory of the three virtues, Nichiren has a foundation for the concept ofa spiri-tual culture." at the beginning of the kaimoku-sho he mentions that three disciplines-Confucianism,non-buddhist teachings, and buddhism-are the foundations when viewingthe history of oriental culture. how these three disciplines can be prioritized can be deter-mined by their depth of understanding of the three virtues-leader, teacher, and parent-which are standards of a spiritual culture. confucianism confines itself to the stage of thecurrent organization of society. non-buddhist teachings relate to the past, present and fu-ture, but do not teach of relief throughout those aspects of time. nichiren asserts in thekaimoku-sho that only the etemnal buddha occupies the noble stage of perfect representa-tion of the three virtues.10)4.continuity fromthe Rissho-ankoku-ron to the kaimoku-shoNichiren submitted the rissho-ankoku-ron to govermment officials as his own personastatement and written challenge. The kaimoku-sho is a work of religious introspection inwhich he elucidates his self-conceived goal to be "nichiren, the practitioner of the lotusSutra,"法華経の行者日蓮and which, as mentioned before, starts off at the beginning witha discussion of respecting the "three virtues of leader, teacher, and parent," that is to say,within the concept of a spiritual culturenichiren criticizes confucianism and non-buddhist teachings from that viewpoint, not-ing that the buddha is fully endowed with the virtues of leader, teacher and parent: "in thethird place, Sakyamuni uddha is the supreme leader and excellent eyes for all the people.He is the bridge that enables them to cross the river of evil passions , he is the skipper whoguides them over the sea of life and death, and he is the fertile field in which they plant theseed of merits."1l)Based on that viewpoint, the kaimoku-sho ascertains the significance of buddhism inSakyamuni buddha's lifetime and follows the succession and development of the buddhistphilosophies of the various schools. nichiren came to the conclusion that at the root of theteaching of buddhism is the lotus Sutra, and that the foundation of the sutra is the doc-trine of ichinen azen一念三千(3,000existences contained in one mind). He confirmsthe meaning of his experiences of persecution based on that conviction, and from that de-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesveloped his clear recognition of "nichiren, the Practitioner of the lotus Sutra."Nichiren then declares that the starting point of his self-recognition as "practitioner o1the lotus Sutra"" is marked by the " three great vows""that he maintainedin his heart datingfrom the rikkyo kaishu立教開宗(his declaration, at seicho-ii temple清澄寺in1253,ofthe establishment of his own teachings and the foimation ofa lotus Sutra-based sect). itisconsidered that the "three great vows"三大誓願themselves contained an aspect of self-completion, but i do not think that is the case. The significance of the completion of thethree great vows stands in relation to the mention of Sakyamuni buddha's "virtues as lead-r, teacher, and parent" at beginning of the kaimoku-sho. The comparison takes shape afollows.12)
Three virtues1.virtue ofa leader.2.virtue of a teacher.3.virtue of a parent.sakyamuni buddha1.The supreme leader for all the people.2.The supreme eyes for all the people.3.the supreme bridge, skipper, and fertile field.1nichiren
1.The vow to become apillar of japan.2.The vow to become the eyes of Japan.3.the vow to become a great vessel for Japan.14at the end of the response to the ninth question in the rissho-ankoku-ron, nichirenwrites: "you should promptly convert from your false faith, and take up the true and soleteaching of the lotus sutra at once. then this triple world of the unenlightened will all be-come buddha lands. will buddha lands ever decay? al the worlds in the universe will be-come pure lands. will pure lands ever be destroyed? when our country does not decayand the worldis not destroyed, our bodies will be safe and our hearts tranquil."1Nichiren didn't limit the relief provided by buddhism only to peace and tranquility inthe heart and mind-the tranquility of heart and mind was thought to extend to the sur-rounding environment and beyond. The rissho-ankoku-ron is the work that made this kindof buddhist study fundamental. nichiren's conclusion is a reflection of the above quota-tion, and it is also an extension of the teaching of the lotus Sutra. it is my conviction thatNichiren's buddhism was always conscious of the Saha world娑婆世界(this world which
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudieswe live),and was based on the ideology that "This Saha world is the land of EternalTranquil light."Considered in that light, the criticism expressed by nichiren presented in the rissho-ankoku-r-his personally developed and submitted political proposal-grasped, andwas based on, a buddhist philosophy like that mentioned above. The kaimoku-sho thenpresents the concept of a spiritual culture based on the buddhist philosophy that concludeswith the lotus Sutra and which explains the meaning of the internal and external relief thatthe lotus Sutra provides. based on buddhist philosophy, in the rissho-ankoku-roNichiren developed his criticism confrontationally, while the kaimoku-sho was a work ofinward-facing reflection regarding his self-recognition as the "practitioner of the lotusSutra."
AsI mentioned at the beginning of this thesis, from the core of nichiren's buddhismthe rissho-ankoku-ron is a treatise looking to the outside, and the kaimoku-sho is a treatiseon the inward looking study ofa conviction. it can be recognized that both treatises clari-fied the philosophy of nichiren buddhism and that both treatises are linked and indispens.able.16)
1)icnami buddhisdictionrywanami Shoten, publishers, 1989).2)id.
3)udana-in nichiki(優陀那院日輝,1800-59)said that "The religion of nichiren begins inRissho-ankoku-ro and that is completed in Senii-sho, and confirms that the center of doctrine isRissho-amkoku-"Senjisho-Ryakuyo"撰時鈔略要jugo-enshu vol.2充治園全集).suca way of thinking is the common understanding of the nichiren school.4)showa-feihovichiren shoin iun minobusan-kuonii temple,1952.p.209.translated byKyotsu hori, edited by Jay sakashita, " writings of nichirenshonin" doctrine i(nichiren shuOverseas propagatio promotioassociation, 2003).5)Ikeda Shoichiro池田正一郎nihon saihen tsushi日本災変通史(Shin-jinbutsu orai-sha,publishers.〓004).6)showa-feihonichiren shonin ibum pp.2338-9.7)showa-feihon nichiren shonin ibup.2358.8)〓三味"(hanami buddhism dictionry).chapter 2of the lotus sutra said "The lord thenrose with recollection and consciousness from his meditation and forthwith addressed the vener-able sariputra" 〓The tathagatas have acquired the highest perfection in skilfulness and the dis-play of knowledge; they are endowed with wonderful properties, such as the display of free and
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiesunchecked knowledge ; the powers, the absence of hesitation: the independent conditions. thestrength of the organs: the constituents of bodhi, the contemplations, emancipations, medita-tions, the degrees of concentration of mind." iwaMotoyutaka the lotns sutra法華経(iwa-nami shoten, publishers, 1967),h. kern the lotus of the true lw pp.30-31.("sacred booksof the East" vol.21).the word "meditation" can seen here and there in the lotus Sutra.9)watanabehoyo: 〓nnichiren's assertion that a man should respect these three virtuesvintues of his ruler, virtues of his teacher, and virtues of his parent" (The age of seventy, com-memorative materials prf. nuMa gisho The subject of Religio d the social life (ryubun-kan, publishers,1998).10)refer to note(9)iwant to introduce the meaning and details of kaimoku-sho here.11)showd-teihon nichiren shonin ibump.58. edited by george tanabe, jr, compiled by kyotsuHori, " writings of nichiren shonin" doctrinel (nichiren shu overseas propagation promotionAssociation, 2002).12)sHIMIZuryuzan nichirendaishonin goibun kogivol.9.referto a note(9).13)showa-feihonnichiren shonin ibunp.538.14)showa-teihonnichiren shonin ibum p.601.15)showa-feihon nichiren shonin ibu p.226."writings ofnichiren shomin" octrine j.6)i wanted to argue the quotation of the literature which influences it, but. on account of thelength ofthe paper, i will do so at some other opportunity.〓
(Key words) rissho-ankoku-ron, kaimoku-sho, the concept ofa spiritual culture(professor emeritus. rissho university)
