The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiStStudieSgrahakakora as pramana:The difference between dignaga and dharmakirtiMIYo Mai
1.IntroductionPhilosophers in the buddhist logico-epistemological school such as dignaga and dhar-makirti consider that all three factors of a valid cognition, namely, obiect of cognition(prameya), means of cognition (pramana) and result of cognition (pramanaphala), areincluded in the same consciousness from the viewpoint of consciousness-only (vinaptima-tra). They are opposed to the argument of externalists such as naiyoyika and yaisesikathat these factors are separate matters, so dignaga and dharmakirti have to investigatethese two issues. First, which aspect of consciousness is distributed to each of these factorsand, second, why is the relevant aspect distributed to the factor.This article does not focus on the first issue since both dignaga and dharmakirti holdthe same opinion.prameya-appearance of the object (visayabhasa), fomm ofthe grasped (grahyakara)praman-appearance of its own svabhosa), fom of the grasper (gruhckokora)pramanaphala-self-awareness (svasamveduna, svasamvitti )Asto the second issue, however, they have different opinions and therefore in this article ]examine the concept of fomm of the grasper (grahakakara) as pramana in relationship tcself-awareness as pramanaphala.2.dignaga's view ograhakukaraIndignaga's workpramanasamuccya with its auto-commentary pramanasamuccaya-vrtti (v)),he states only thatpramana is the form of the grasper (see ps1)and wecan find no positive argument for it. however, we can find a clue in the passage below,which explains about self-awareness in the course of mentioning that the result of cogni-tion is self-awareness.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudiesor the result [of cognition] is self-awareness (svasamvitti) here. to explains cognition (inana)arises with two appearances, namely, that of itself (svabhusa) and that ofthe object (visayabhasa)The self-awareness of it (inana) which has [these] two appearances [occurs], and this [self-awareness] is the result.1)in this passage, dignaga says that cognition arises with two appearances, that of itself andthat of the object, and that self-awareness of the cognition which has these appearances oc-curs. Moreover, this appearance of itself refers to the form of the grasper. in this way, dig-naga introduces the fact that cognition has two appearances-that is to say, a duality ofcognition-a a presupposition for self-awareness, asserting one of the appearances,tamely, the appearance of its ohe form of the grasper) to be the means of cogni-tion.
3.dharmakirti's view ongrahakukorawhereas dignaga apparently accepts the duality of cognition as a presupposition forself-awareness, dhammakirti does not agree. he proves that cognition has the nature of self-awareness on the grounds that extemnal objects cannot be observed by direct perception,and defines self-awareness as cognition's manifestation by itself (svayam prakusate, seepvi320-329).as for the duality of cognition, he does not accept it in a positive man-ner. if anything, he emphasizes that it is based on confusion (see pvi22-219,330-331).itis true that he demonstrates in detail the duality and nature of the self-awareness ofcognition from the standpoint where he accepts the duality ipramanavarttika v, seepvi425),butinpramanaviniscayvin),in which dhamakirti constnucts his ownargument more vigorously, these demonstrations are omitted and an argument regardingnon-duality between cognition and its object, a certain type of consciousness-only, is inter-polated instead (see pvin39,11-42,8).In addition, the duality of cognition is derived onlyfrom the non-duality of them (see Pvin,7)and plays no direct role in the proof of self-awareness. indharmakirti's view, such as that stated above, it is not fit that self-awarenessoccurs based on the duality of cognition, so grahakakora could have a different meaning.〓pvin, the establishment of prameya, pramana and pramanaphala is dealt with in twcpassages that are introduced below.
The japanese asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies3.1.explanationinconformity with conventional appearancea form of the object (visayukara) and inner determination (paricchedo 'ntarchgrahakakara)appear (laksyate) [fictitiously as if they are separated, exactly] when they occur as those whichlave a self-cognized nature (svasamviditarupa).In that, the establishment of the obiect, means anresult [ofcognition] is precisely according to [this fictitious] appearance laksana).In this passage, dharmakirti says that the establishment of the object, means and resultof cognition is in accordance with seeing (darsana) or fictitious appearance (laksana)not with the own ature (tattva) of the cognition (see pvin353).Thismeans that the three are not divided by cognition's own nature, but by its fictitious or con-ventional appearance, that is, it is a problem of the viewer. Moreover, it is in accordancewith such kind of appearance that a form of the obiect and inner determination occur hav-ing a self-cognized nature. The position of the grahakakara in this context is similar to thatidignaga's view, in that it is treated in contrast with the fomm of obiect. however, dhar-makirti explains it in conformity with conventional appearance, describing it in anotherway, as inner detemmination, whereas dignaga explains it using the appearances which ex-ist within the cognition.3.2.explanationinconformity with cognition's own natureLike dignaga, dharmakirti approves the form of the grasper and the form of the obiectin conformity with convention, but he also shows another attitude toward prahakukura,setting up self-awareness itself at the starting point.Therefore, the fomm of the grasper (grahakakara) is admitted to be the establishing [ factor]-dhanpramana) of self-awareness (svsamvid), because its being as it (self-awareness) is es-tablished by means of the [ fommof the grasper]. . in the case [of externalism] also those (passionand so on) are capable of self-awareness, because they have the nature of immediate experience(anubhava). Therefore, the capability (yogpata) [for self-awareness] is the means, [passion ancso on itself is the object, and self-awareness is the result. [alil kinds of cognition in the case ofonsciousness-only are the same.] having the nature of determinationparicchedatmata) is corsidered as the form of the grasper, and this is the capability for itself.here dharmakirti states that the form of grasper and self-awareness are pramana and pra-manaphala, respectively, on the basis of their relationship where the former establishes thelatter(vyavasthapana).in other words, grahakakara as pramana is the establishing(vyawasthapaka), and svasamvid as pramanaphala is the established vyavasthapya).4)Moreover, he says that all kinds of cognition have same structure as the awareness of men-〓

The  uapaneSe sSOciationofndian and BuddhiStStudiestal activities (caitta) such as passion, hatred, delusion and pleasant and unpleasant feel-ings. These mental activities are extended, which are already proved to have themselves asthe obiects, and thus constitute self-awareness (see pv249-280,pvin-27,6).it isnotable that the form of the grasper as pramana is said in other ways, not only as havingthe nature of determination(paricchedatmata), but also as the capability for itself (atmaniyogyata) or the capability for self-awareness (svatmasamvidi yogya[ta])' dharmakirtidoes not assume any factor as the means of cognition other than self-awareness which isthe result of cognition. he asserts that the capability for self-awareness itself is the meanwhich detemmines the self-awareness, interpreting this to be "grahakukara."4.conclusion
As described above, the meaning of grahakakara as pramana differs according to dig-naga and dharmakirti , this difference is relative to how each considers self-awareness. onthe one hand, dignaga accepts the duality of cognition as a presupposition for self-aware-ness, and considers one of the two, grahakakara as pramana. on the other hand, dhamma-kirti also admits inner detemmination to be pramana in a way similar to dignaga's, accord-ing to the explanation in conformity with conventional appearance. however, consideringthe explanationin conformity with cognition's own nature, he asserts that the capability folself-awareness is pramana and does not presuppose the duality of cognition.1)pS(v)4,3-5 svasamvittih phalam vatra dvyabhasam hi jnanam mpadyate svabhasamvisayabhosam c. tasyobhayabhasasya yot svasamvedanam) tat phalam. cf. hattori [1968:p.28,29-35],kataoka [29],kellner [20220-221].2)pvin8,2-4: visayakarah kascit paricchedus cantarah ssamviditarupo joyamano laksyate.iatra yathalaksanam eveyam meyamanaphalasthitih. cf. vetter [1966:p.90,20-23;p.91,21-25].tosaki [1993a1-11]3)pvi,-43,2 tasmad grahakakarah svsamvidh sdhanam istam, tato 'syas tadbha-vavyavasthdpanot. . tatrapy anubhavatmanat te yogych svatmasamvidi / itis yogyata manamatma meych phalam svavit i grahakakarasamkhyata paricchedatmatatmami /  yogyata ..seepv363-366.cf. vetter [1966:98,13-27,99,20-33],tosaki [19933,15-36].4)this notion about the relationship between pramana and pramanaphala is one of the charac-teristics of dharmakirti. He shows the same idea from the viewpoint of externalismor sautranti-ka. cf. tosaki [1993b:1,n.46],Mai miyo [2009]"dharmakirti's view about cognition ofobjects: why meyarupata cn be a means of valid cognition(ダルマキールテイの対象認識に関する一考察)",Tovo no shiso to shukvo26.
The ujapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies5)regarding the concept of yogyata in the case of the relationship between sufficient complex ofcauses and its result, see iwata [199186-87]n the classification of Three kinds of Reason〓ramanaviniscaya i reduction of Reasons to svabhavahetu and karpahetu," studies in thebudlthist episfemologicdl tradition, wien.abbreviations and biblioqraphical ReferencespSvdignag's pramanasamuccaya, chapter l, ed. Emst Steinkellner, www.oeaw.ac.atfias/Mat/dignaga pspdf, 205.pv: pramanavaritika (dharmakirti):see tosaki [1985].pvindharmakirti's pramanaviniscaya, chapters l d2,ed. ernst steinkellner, china tibetology pub-lishing house and austrian academy of sciences press, beijing-vienna 007. hattori [18].Masaaki hattori, digndga,〓ercepfion, harvard university press, cambridge. kataoka [29]Kei kataoka, "Exegetical problems of pramanasamuccya19.dignaga and jinendrabuddhi(『集量論』19解釈の問題点),"jib58-1.kellner [2010]: birgit kellner, "self-awareness vsamvedana,indignaga's pramanasamuccaya and-vrtti aclose Reading," iip38. tosaki [198]:hiromaseTosaki, bukkyyoninshikiron o kenkyu, gekam(仏教認識論の研究下巻),daitoshuppansha, to-kyo. tosaki [1993]: hiromasa tosaki, "annotated translation of the pramanaviniscava. chap-teri(9)(法称著『プラマーナ・ヴィニシュチャヤ』第1章現量(知覚)論の和訳(9)),*Teisugaku nenpo52.tosaki [193:hiromasa tosaki, "annotated translation of the pra-manaviniscaya, chapter I(0)(同(10)),"nishinihon shukvogaku sshi 50. vetter [1966]:Tilmann vetter, dharmakirti's pramanaviniscayah. i. kapitel, osterreichische akademie der wis-senschaften. wien.(This article was supported by grant-in-aid for jSPS Fellows)<Key words> dignaga, dharmakirti, grahakakara, pramana, svasamvedanaGraduate student. waseda university. JSPS Research Fellow c1
