The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiesWoncheuk圓測obimba本質and pratibimba影像in his Commentoryon the samdhinirmocan-sutraA. Charles MULlerBackqround
Inits standard meaning in yogacara works, bimba, translated into chinese as本質(c.benzhi, j. honzetsu), refers to the bare form of an object of sense or of thought, before ithas received any interpretation, overlay, or categorization through the cognitive process.Its counterpart is pratibimba影像(c. yingxiang, j. yozo), which is a reflected image"1of the bimba, that which we actually "see" on the surface of consciousness, having beeninterpreted andtransfommed by the cognitive process. there was, during the early receptionin the west of weishi documents, a widely-promulgated misunderstanding of the termhonzetsu, wherein it was often rendered into english as "archetypes," as seen, for example,i daito shuppansha's japanese-english buddhist dictionary(Revised Edition,1991)which contains the following entry:honzetsu本質archepype. This term is used by the hosso sect to indicate the true substance a phe-nomenon of which we perceive only the image. Thus, when we see a tree, we don't see the tree it-self (whichis the honzetsu) but the image of the tree which is reflected in the sobun相分(cf. shi-bum) division of our consciousness.This is partly right, in the sense that we do only see an image-of whatever it is that isthere. but it is clear that the authors of this dictionary held some combination of misunder-standing ofthe meaning ofarchetypes,  or of the function of biia ("seeds") in the dlayavi-inana. after all, these "seeds," while producing phenomena, are themselves continually be-ing impregnated and reproduced, bringing about a complex condition of incessantcombination of change that includes continuity of sameness. we will return to considerpossible causes for this kind of interpretation below.
The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudieSwoncheuk圓測o bimha本質ad pratibimba影inhis commentorp on the samdhimirmocana-sutr . mullER)(199)development of the bimb-pratibimba framework in the yogacara TextsMost of the detailed explanations and applications of the bimba-pratibimba pair-especially those that have informed the canonical definitions contained in ast asan buddhistlexicons-are derived from kuiji's窺基(632-682)commentaries: especially those orthe yogacarabhumi-sastra,' and his detailed elaborations of the cheng weishi lu. Theseworks contain extensive discussions of本質and影像from various perspectives. Mostimportantly, he often treats these notions in the context of their application within the ev-ryday waking consciousness, rather than only in the context of yogic trances. we willbriefly look at some of kuiii's contributions belowThe initial appearance of the pair, however, occurs within a well-known passage that isshared almost verbatim between the samdhinirmocana-sutra and the yogdcarabhumi-sas-tra.  in this initial reference to the pair of bimba and pratibimba, the meanings of, and re.lationship between the two terms are explained only in a very minimal way, leaving themeaning of bimbaitself almost fully open to speculation. itis only in later yogacara works(mainly commentarial works) that the concepts come to be defned as we know them to-day. also, the discussionin this passage ofthe samdhinirmocana-sutra deals strictly withthe way images appear on the surface of the consciousness of yogins who are practicingsamatha and vipasyana meditation. it does not discuss the case of material objects imping-ing on the consciousness ofregular people in daily waking activity.some standard interpretations Provided by kuijiThe pair of bimba andpratibimba became an important component of kuiii's account ofthe cognitive experience in a numerous ways, and it is primarily in his works that detailedexplanations first appear regarding the meaning of bimba. one of the descriptions providedby kuiji, wherein bimba are explained as being produced from seeds" in the dlayaviina-na)  is likely the source based on which some early westem scholars ended up connectingbimba with the western notion of archetypes. one would guess that such scholars had tak-en biia to be something akin platonic forms, or some other kind of original conceptualtemplate which serves as the model for generating like appearances. however, since Yoga-caric biia are understood to be continually in flux, created each instant as a combination ofa wide range of factors, a reified interpretation such as that of "archetype" misses the point.
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studieskuiji raises the topic of bimba and pratibimba in his commentaries in a variety of con-texts, many of them which deliberately problematize their relationship with each other, aswell as their relationship with the four elements. Their role is examined in the function ofavariety of mental states, both yogic and conventional, both human and non-human. there8) there
are cases where bimba are said to be produced from seeds, and cases where they are not.〓n one hand, bimba are seen to be necessary as objective bases, as without them, prati-bimba would have no application whatsoever.  on the other hand, for divine beings, thereliance on bimba to cognize objects is not necessary.1 nor are they always required irthe cognition of those who are exercising supernatural powers.11Kuiji's best known usage of本質and影像is seenin his analysis of the objects of cog-nition into three general types, known as the三類境(c. sanlei jing, j. samrni ky'o).12)thepair is also discussed making the distinction of影像being the " perceptual object directlyperceived by the consciousness"親所縁(c. 〓insuoyudn, j. shin shoen), whereas bimba-the raw substance本質,is not known directly, and is called the " indirectly perceived ob-iect"疎所縁(c. suoyudn, j. so shoen). These two aspects taken together are understoodto constitute the ""seen part"相分(c. xiang fen, J. sobun) of consciousness, being the " rawsubstance seen part"本質相分(c. benzh xiangfen, j. honzetsu sobun) and the " reflectedimage seen part"影像相分(c. yingxiang xiangfen, J. yz sobun). there are a number ofother ways that the pair fits into kuiji's articulations of cognitive function. but let us nowproceed to the discussion of these concepts in woncheuk.bimba本質adpratibimba影像inwoncheukwhile the discussion of this pair of concepts in east asian buddhist weishi scholarshiphas been dominated by kuiii's extensive and detailed work, he is not the only one who sawthe seminal importance of these categories for their application in various epistemologicaland hemmeneutic situations, as woncheuk圓測(613-696),for one, also paid a fair amountof attention to this topic. while there does not seem to be anything in woncheuk's writingson this topic that directly disagrees with the interpretations of kuiji, nonetheless, as in hisother writings, woncheuk tends to be an original thinker, and thus utilizes the pair in dif-ferent contexts, and draws on different sources than famous colleague and rival. in hiscommentary to the samdhinirmocana-sutra,3) woncheuk presents two major discussionsinvolving bimba-pratibimba: one is in connection with the explication of the famous paral-
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studieswoncheuk圓測o bimba本質ad pratibimba影inhis commemtary on the samdhinirmocuna-sutra a.c. MulleR)(201lel passage found in the samdhinirmocana-sutrc and yogdcarabhumi-sastra, wherein prat-ibimba are the obiects of samatha and vipasyand meditation, and where the precise meaning of bimbais somewhat problematic. The other comes midway through the introductoryportion of the commentary, where he is setting up his hermeneutic framework for the com-mentary through the discussion of such matters as the title of the sutra, the possibility forteaching, and so forth. Here, we are introduced to a new type of application of bimba andpratibimba an attempt to employ them in a situation not related to visual objects, as is al-most always the case, but rather to the explanation of the "essence of the teaching"宗體(c.zongti; J. shutai). while the discussion of bimba-pratibimba in the sutra passage onsamatha and vipasyand is extremely valuable for understanding these concepts, due tcspace constraints, we will here limit our discussion to his usage of the concepts in his introduction, since this is of greater interest in terms of showing woncheuk's creativity.Applying bimba  pratibimba in the identification of the essence of thTeaching宗體
If this model ofthe bimba-pratibimba pair is going to be applied as a way of distinguish-ing stages or modes in the process ofthe apprehension of perceptual objects, how should itwork in the case of the other senses or perceptions, and what kind of vocabulary shouldb4used? in most cases, this question may not so readily arise, since the visual model is sopredominant. both bimbd and pratibimba fundamentally mean " image.7 and all of the ex-planations and metaphors are done through visual imagery, with the mirror and its reflec-tions being the preeminent trope. but what about sound, odor, taste, and tactile sensationHow do we describe these, ortry to make them work through the same paradigm?Hlere, we can see some wisdomin Xuanzang's choice of the compound word of本質torender bimba, which, unlike its Sanskrit counterpart, has no reference to imagery, but liter-ally means something like "raw substance." we can also understand, perhaps, that findinga term that functioned with equal neutrality among the sensory fields to refer to the " pro-cessed" aspect of sensation/perception would be much more challenging, and perhaps it isfor that reason that he opted for the readily understandable equivalent of reflected image"影像for pratibimba. This kind of awareness, however, cannot but problematize our attemptsat English translation, if, for example, we needed to find a word that can also adequatelyexpress the same kind of modality as "reflected image" for the processed form of sound or
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies202)woncheuk圓測on bimba本質and pratibimba影inhis commemtary om the samdhinirmocana-sutra (a.c.mULueR)other sensory and perceptual obiects.14.woncheuk's discussion of本質/影像in the context of the " buddha's teaching" comesin the middle portion of his introduction to his commentary, where he is establishing hishemmeneutical structure. in the sectionon the explanation of the Essence of the teaching.woncheuk enters into an extensive philosophical inquiry attempting to identify exactlywhat the "essence" of the teaching is. This leads him to a discussion of the "three aggrega.tions" of words,名身(c. mingshen, j. myoshin), phrases旬身(c. jushen, j. kushin), andsyllables文身(c. wen shen, j. monshin), which further leads to the discussion ofthe rela-tion of these three to a fourth element-sound音聲(c. yinsheng, J. onsho)and further,which of these is to be considered as the "essence" of the teaching. Since he enriches theargument by presenting a range of interpretations based on the viewpoints of variousschools of lndian philosophy-both buddhist and non-buddhist-the discussion gets rath-er complicated, as some of the more prominent early indian philosophical texts had muchto say about the metaphysical status of sound. in the final analysis, however, in the case ofthe buddhist scriptures, woncheuk takes words"" rather than " sound"" as the essence, citingthe opinion of his master xuanzang as the final authority.This discussion, which consists of a comparative analysis of the positions of various phi-losophers on the existence or not of "raw substance" and representations"" in the contextofhe previously discussed four phenomena of sound音聲and the aggregations of words名身,phrases旬身,and syllables文身,starts off with:These four dharmas, according to the tathagata's own explanation, are called raw substance.' thelistener's transformation of these through cognition is called "representation.' The distinction be-ween the existence and non-existence of these raw substances and representations is broadly distin.uuished into four kinds oftenets by the various traditions.1This is a novel and interesting application of the concept of bimba/pratibimbathat is some.what different from the tvpe of explanation we find in kuiji's writings. Yet on the otherhand. it might tell us something about the way that woncheuk, and perhaps the other bud-dhist thinkers of his period understood the notions of sound, words, phonemes, etc.For it seems that if we were presented with these four seminal lndian abhidharmic-Yo-gacaric phenomena of words, phrases, phonemes, and sound, our first reaction would be toregard sound itself as a bimba, and the other three as pratibimba. but does taking all fouras bimba mean that woncheuk sees words, phrases, and phonemes uniformly as pre-con-
The uapaneSe asSociationofIndian and buddhist studieSNoncheuk圓測on bimba本質and pratibimba影inhis commentary on the samdhinirmocana-sitra c. muulER)(203ceptual entities ? such an interpretation is not impossible. it would mean that he under-stands that our thinking consciousness apprehends all of these things to a certain level inthese distinct yet "unrepresented" units, and afterwards reflects them as meaningful units.Itmay also be the case that woncheuk is intentionally using the notion of bimba/pratibim-ba here ina looser sense as a hermeneutical device.The four hermeneutic positions that woncheuk sets up to distinguish the approaches of pri-or philosophers are those of:1.the existence of raw substance and non-existence ofrepresentations有本無影;2.the existence of representations and non-existence ofraw substances有影無本;3.the existence of both raw substances and representations本影倶有;4.the existence of neither raw substances nor representations本影倶無.In a format very close to that which he uses later onin his exegesis of the well-known bim-ba-pratibimba discussion in the context of meditation, he summarizes all of the argumentsof the philosophers who support each of the four positions, and then wraps up the discus-〓on (as he often does in his commentary), citing xuanzang as the final authority (andonthis occasion. dharmapala as well). This discussion can be summarized as follows.1.existence of Raw substance and the Non-existence of Reflections有本無影-wonch-euk says that there are three philosophical streams that support this view.(1)that ofthe sarvastivadins, for whom all buddha-voices are only contaminated. Some also syhat words, etc., are definitely of morally indeterminate karmic character. this kind ofpoint is elaboratedin detail in the mahovibhasa-sastra. (2)the position taken up bythe Mahasamghika, ekavyavaharika一説部,lokottaravadins説出世部,kukkutika〓胤部,and so forth, who say that all world-honored buddhas are transmundane, lack-ing contaminated dharmas. The words of the tathagatas turn the wheel of the dharma;the buddhas, in a single voice, explain all the teachings. (3)The position of the Ba-husrutiya多聞部説,who take the "five notes"1 of the buddhas teaching to be trans.mundane. all other kinds of voice are the mundane teachings. woncheuk commentsthat the reason all these schools have this misunderstanding is because they don't getthe teaching of consciousness-only.2.existence of Reflections and non-Existence of Raw Substances有影無本-the sec-ond tenet is that of the existence of representations and the non-existence of raw sub-stances. The nagasena那伽犀那say that the buddha-realization consists only of thus-
The japanese sSociation of Indian and buddhistStudies204)woncheuk圓測onbimba本質andpratibimba影inhis commentary onthe samdhimirmocuna-sutra c. muller)ness and the thusness-cognition, and does not involve coarse attributes such as form,sound, and so forth. according to woncheuk, Sthiramati堅慧論師and vairasena金剛軍also support this interpretation.3.existence of both raw Substances and Reflections本影倶有-such scholars as can-dragupta月藏and bandhuprabha親光say that all tathagatas are endowed with suchattributes as the form and sound of the three bodies. The suyarna-prabhosottama-sutra says: "The Tathagata is able to tumn three kinds of dharma wheels-the tuming[wheel], illuminating [wheel], and the maintaining [wheel]1)this kind of teach-ing shows that what is witnessed is not the same. in some cases the listener's con-sciousness transforms [what is heard] to appear like another teaching. hence theyknow that raw substance and representations both exist.4.existence of neither Raw Substances nor Reflections本影倶無-coming from thepoint of view of the absolute tnuth, bhavaviveka清辯advocates the emptiness of thenatures of all dhammas. Some assume that dhammapala護法took the stance of the ul-timate truth when he said that in the Tathagata's holy teaching, raw substances andrepresentations are both non-existent. This is because in the ultimate truth, there areno words and so forth.Finally, he wraps up with:Although the positions are categorized into four like this, the school of the trepitaka of the greatTang (xuanzang) and of dharmapala have two interpretations. one is from the perspective theteaching of reality, in which there is only raw substance andno representations, this is because rawsubstance is that which is properly explained by the tathagata. in the second theory both are prop.erly included, this is because both arise according to the power of the tathagata's teaching. (hb.1.126c12-15)
From here, this discussion segues into another fascinating discussion, that also dealswith the elements of word, phonemes, sound, etc.-the discussion of the possibility of theholy teaching from an entirely different perspective: the question of how to deal with thestatement appearing in the lankavatara-sutra and elsewhere that says: 〓during the timebetween the night i attained supreme perfect enlightenment, until the night i entered finalnirvana, i did not explain a single thing. Furthemmore, it did not explain it in the past, andwill not explain it in the future. not-explaining is the buddha's explanation." (t670.16.498c17-19)That, however, needs to be left as the topic for another paper.
The  uapanese sSociation ofindian and buddhiststudieswoncheuk圓測on bimba本質and pratibimba影in his commentary onthe samdhimirmocama-suitra . muluer)(205)〓
1)we use the word "image" here with caution, because a full extension of the notion to allsensory functions means that it has to be more than simply " image," as will be noted below.2)merriam-webster:(1)the original pattemn or model of which all things of the same type arepresentations or copies.(2)an inherited idea or mode of thought in the psychology of c. g,Jung that is derived from the experience of the race and is present in the unconscious of theindividual. Japanese:アーキタイプ(典型,原型,元型)スイスの心理学者カール・ユンクの用いた心理学用語.人間の心の深層にあって遺伝的に伝わり,集合的無意識を作り上げている心像の基本的な型.(webalcdictionary: http:/www.alc.co.ip/)3)The iuqielunfi瑜伽論記(t1828).4)primarily in his cheng weishi lu shuii成唯識論述記(t1830), and his cheng weishi lunzhangzhong shuyco成唯識論掌中樞要(t1831).5)dealt with most recently in japanese scholarship by kaTokojiro, who analyzed these passages, yielding the convincing repont that they are not quite as identical in their full connotationas has been traditionally assumed. See kaokojiro,加藤弘二郎."pratibimba in the contexof vijnaptimatra Theory: acomparative study of the sravakabhumi and the samdhinirmocangitra (chap.vI)「唯識」という文脈で語られる影像".indo tetsugku bukkyo kenkyu, vol.9,pp.3-65.
6)This situation is of course true for many other seminal concepts that are held up as yogacareparadigms, as I have recently tried to demonstrate in my forthcoming article that deals with thedevelopment of the notion of the two hindrances, entitled "The contribution of the yogacarabhumi to the system of the two hindrances," inan edited volume in progress.7)for example,玄師述三藏云.從頼耶識中名言種子生本質相.(t1828.47)熏成種子生本質故.(t1831620b16)8)See, for example, t1831.4332b3-7.勝定果色大種造不.如對法第一末疏.雖有五文説造不同.説先變爲大種後造色生.竝同繋等文者.有義此説依欲色二界地定果色.以有所依身故.無色界定果色.從本質大種造.定中無大種.無所依身.9)若約本質.或無本質法一切名等.同縁一境故.與事等不同.若影像相相似名等.何事一種.無分別智縁如無影不可相似.不同一.故知有本質者.影像名相似.本質名同一.若無本質者.有爲縁相似名同一.無爲縁境一名同一.此據實縁故不相違(T1831.4334a6-11)10)其上天眼耳見聞下色聲不託本質.(t1814226)11)若定通力所變五塵.非必有本質如生上界縁下界地色.或身在下起天眼耳縁上地色等叉解異熟之心縁境浮淺.非要藉本質.(T1831.4348c20-23)12)These are:(1)性境(c. xingring, j. shokyoobjects as they are in themselves. These are images manifested through transformation based on raw substance, and are correct objects of cog-nition. They are manifested fromlaya) seeds.(2)獨影境(c. diying ing, j. dokuno kyo"image-only objects." objects manifested from a merely subjective view. these are objects thatexist purely in the mind and have no relationship to any raw substance. illusions are examples of
The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudieS13)the hce simmil gyeong so解深密經疏,containedinanguk bulgyojeonseo vol.1, pp.123b-the objects of this category, but this can also include objects that appearin meditation, or objectsperceived by devas.(3)帶質境(c. doizhi iing, j. toizetsu hyo)objects that denive from rawsubstance but which are not perceived exactly as they are. despite being grounded in raw sensateappearance, they are, according to the circumstance, not correctly apprehensible, and thus theyare the sorts of obiects that we call "mistaken," "misconstrued." or "misidentified." See成唯識論掌中樞要t1831.43.620a20.478c5.
14)although it is difficult to find an explanation of the concepts of bimba-pratibimbain anon-vi.sual trope, interestingly, dan lusthaus does use the example of soundto explain the meaning ofhyle inbuddhist phenomenologRoutledge-curzon, 2002),where he makes the helpful dis-tinction between tone (bimba) and note (pratibimba). (p.15) however, in the present contextof woncheuk's discussion, we are not talking about music, and not even exactly about ""speech,"but the " buddha's teaching." For本質inthis case, perhaps we can still use tone, for the pro-cessed perception, however, it seem that it would be possible that representation could vary inunits such as phoneme, word, and phrase.15)如是四法,如來自説,名爲本質.聞者識變名之爲影.如是本影有無差別,總約謠宗有其四句.(〓bj1168-10)16)These are the so-called suffering, emptiness, impermanence, no-self, and the quiescence otnirvana-because these are cited from the holy teachings.17)T664.16368b10-11.These three are explained by Paramartha and others as the three periodsof the teaching三時教.abbreviations:〓hnguk bulgyo jeonseo.韓國佛教全書(The collected works of korean buddhism)(1984).Seoul. dongguk University press. (electronic text from dongguk university used assource)
taisho shinshu dizokvo.大正新脩大藏經(japanese edition ofthe buddhist canon)(1924-35).tokyo: daizo kyokai. (Electronic texts from sat usedas source(Key words> woncheuk圓測,bimba本質,pratibimba影像,kuiji窺基(project professor, The university of tokyo)
