The japanese association of Indian and BuddhiststudiesaReport on the study of Sanskrit Manuscript ofthe pramanasamuccayatika chapter 3KATSURa Shoryu1.I have been working on the Sanskrit manuscript of the pramanasamuccayatika (here-after pT)chapter 3 since the fall of200and it is time to report on the progress of mywork so far. The photocopies of the two manuscripts that constitute a codex unicus of thePST were made available to me under the General agreement between the china tibetolo-gy research center and the austrian academy of Sciences. i would like to express my sin-cere gratitude to both institutes and especially to prof. ernst Steinkellner and his staff at theAcademy who provided me with their preliminary studies on the manuscripts. Those whoare interested in how these materials became available may read rof. Steinkellner's 2003Gonda lecture.1)Prof. Steinkellner and his teamin vienna have already finished critically editing the firstwo chapters of the pST. they published both critical and diplomatic editions of chapte11, those of chapter 2will be published soon. dr. helmut krasser and his team at theAcademy are now workingonchapter5.prof. steinkellner has put online his hypothetical reconstruction of dignaga's pramana-uamuccaya, chapter l, with svavrtti (hereafter ps and pv))and published some frag-ments of the samnkhya text recovered fromT Chapter l4rs. ono Motoi and Takashi-ma Jun published the keyword icontext index to jlinendrabuddthis visalamalavatiPramanasamuccayatika chapter ne of the members of vienna team, dr. chu juniiehas published two articles based on his phd study ofpST Chapter 1.Regarding T Chapter2, dr. horst lasic of the austrian academy of Sciences is cur-rently preparing the reconstruction and translation of ps and pSv. he has also published acouple of articles based on his study ofpT Chapter 2.with the help of several scholars in Japan, I have been preparing the critical edition ofthe psT and the reconstruction of PS and PSv chapter 3. to date I have edited 5 out of70 folios that cover(1) the general definition of a logical proof (pararthammana),(2)
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studie164)aReport on the study of sanskrit Manuscript of the pramanasamuccayatika chapter3 (S. katsura)dignaga's own views on the thesis (paksa) and pseudo-thesis (paksabhasa),(3)his criti-cism of the nyaya and the vadavidhi 's views,(4) dignaga's own views on the reasot(hetu) and pseudo-reason hetvabhasa),(5)his criticism of the vadavidhi,(6) that ofNyaya,(7)and that of vaisesika, and (8) about one-third of the samnkhya section, whichis followed by(9)his criticism of the vadavidhi, (1)nyaya and (11)vaisesika viewson the pseudo-reason. it will take another year or so to complete the edition ofpsT chap-ter 3, after that Iam planning to proceed to edit chapters 4and6.Ioctober 28I attended the beiling Seminar on tibetan Studies held at the china ti-betology Research center and presented the paper "Rediscovering dignaga through jinen-drabuddhi," in whichi reconstructed the Sanskrit version ofpS chapter 3 verses 1-31thatcorrespond to sections(1)to(4)mentioned above.8' dr. watanabe toshikazu, one of themembers of my team, has so far published or presented a number of papers based on hisstudy ofpST chapter 39 both dr. watanabe and dr. Shiga kiyokuni, another member ofmy team, presented a paper at the xivth world Sanskrit conference held at kyoto univerjity in September20 that will be published in the special issue of journalof indichi-losophy.10)
Regarding chapter5, ole holten pind finally completed his thesis, " dignaga's Philoso-phy of language: dignaga oanyopoha. pramanasamuccaya v. texts, Translation andAnnotation," which may be found at http:/othes.univie.ac.at/8283.asI mentioned above,Dr. krasser and his teamin vienna are working onthe critical edition of PST Chapter5.2.as a result of my research oST Chapter 3,i would like to present the reconstructedSanskrit text ofps32-43ab, which corresponds to sections(5)to (6) mentioned above.Nearly 80%of the original Sanskrit text can be restored from the pST and other sourcesbold scripts are used for words from the psT, nommal scripts for those from other sourcesand itatics for those retranslated from tibetan translations(1)vadavidhiof vasubandhutadrsa yady abhavy eva vinasadharano bhaet /vinaivety avadharyam sy sahabhavy eva kevalamtadrssaivety anistam ca drsta eko'py anekadha /tadatmyena darsitsced asakyo hetuvacinabhutarthena vatha noktam kenakarena kutraca/inapakatikramas caivamnahy adrstarthasadhanah
The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudieSaReport on the study of sanskrit Manuscript of the pramanasamuccayatika chapter 3(S. katSuRa)(165)caksusatvadi vadhrauvye dhvaner hetuh prasajyate/nopadarsyata ity etat katham kutreti noditamsahabhavyena sadhye cen na drstantadvayad gateh/anitydtisu taddrste kim amyt sadhyam isvate ///.(2)nvaya
sadhanamyadi sadhammyamna vakyamso na pancami/vakyamcet tad visesyam syat sadhanatvad asambhavah7tapprasaigo dvidhanyatra tad asadhammyahetukam/na tatrapi dvidha dosat prakrtatve 'nyasambhavahsvalaksanena badha cenna vikalpadisambhavat /tasmat sasthy astu tatrapi visesanam anarthakamsarparakyam anistmced yasyestam tad visesyatamnarte prayojanad istam mukhyasabdarthalanghanamparyoyamatram notsargasyapavade'sti sambhavah)hetuh syac ca tadabhasadrte tulyanyadhammata1.(3)vaisesikal5)〓
samudayy eva dharmah sya sadhyuu dharmadharminanvisistah sadhyavaddhammah prapto 'nyasyapy aniscitahhadisattvaprasidchau ca prayogo nopapadyate/43a3.In the following, i would like to discuss some vadavidhi, Nyaya and vaisesika frag-ments that are referred toinST.(1)vadavidhi
jinendrabuddhi refers to two definitions of the thesis, viz., a linguistic statement (sabda)of the thesis that vasubandhu and other indian logicians call pratiina' and the content(aritha) of the thesis that they call paksa.' vasubandhu defines the former as "a statementof that which is to be proven,' (sadhyubhidhana) and the latter "the state of affairs that iswished (to be proven) in the logical investigation' (vicaranayam isto  rthah).18)In thisconnection it is to be noted that dignaga uses the single technical term paksa" for both astatement and its content of thesis, although he is well aware that the thesis has these twoaspects; kumarila in his slokavarttik anumana chapter severely criticized dignaga bypointing out that the latter did not use two separate terms.jinendrabuddhi refers to the following definition of the reason todrgvinabhavidharmo-padarsanam hetuh reason is that which presents a property that does not exist
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies(166)aRepont on the study of Sansknit Manuscript of the pramanasamuccayatika chapter3 (S. katsura)(abhavin) without (vina) the similar (tadrs)." The recovered fragment is slightly differ-ent from the one quoted in the nyayavarttika: tadrgavinabhavidharmopadarsanam hetuh.19although the two fragments do not differ in meaning, i prefer jinendrabuddhi's versionbecause it seems to represent the older version of the vadavidhi. in order to show his inter-pretation of the vadavidhi's definition of the reason, i quote the following passagePST13-5: tadrgvinabhaidharmopadarsanam hetur iti. yo ' rthah sabdanipyatvadih sdhyaltodrsa taiiatiyena vinay rtho na kvacid bhavati, yathoa prayatnanantariyakatyam anityatvenagmina dhuma iti, sa tudrgvinabhaui dharmas fsyopadarsanam, upadarsyate 'neneti wacanam, yathaprayatnanantariyakatvad ipyevamadih, sa henuh. yenatu nopadarsyate, sa ma hetuh. yatha caksusat-vad amityah sabda ityevamadih.〓a reason is that which presents a property that does not existwithout the similar." whena state of affairs such as the non-eternity of sound is to be proven, thatstate of affairs which never exists without the similar, i.e., that which is of the same kind (as thatwhich is to be proven), as e.g. the property of being the result of an effort (does not exist without)the property of being non-eternal and smoke (without) fire, is aproperty that does not exist with-mut the similar. a reason is that which presents that (property),i.e., a statement by which (thatproperty) is presented, as e.g. "because it is the result of an effott." however, that by which (thajroperty) is not presented is notareason, as e.g. " soundis non-etemnal because it is visible."dignaga refers to the vadavidhi definition of the example drstanta), which nuns "anexample is that which shows the connection between the two (viz., the property and thesimilar)"(tayoh smbandhanidarsanm drstantah).0Furthermore, in the discussion ofthe Samnkhya proof of purusa, he quotes a half verse by acary vasubandhu) "if the in-ernal accumulations were (the reason for the existence of purusa), then similarly (theeyes and others) would not be for the sake of others"" (sanghato antaro nantara) evamatha n syuh pararthakah).21for a detailed discussion of this fragment, please see drwatanabe's article.22)(2)nvaya
Dignaga and jinendrabuddhi do not offer any new materials on the nyaya school. jinen-drabuddhi enumerates the five members of the Nyaya proof at PST1b1-2(cf. nyoya-sutra (hereafter NS)1.1.32:pratiinahetudaharanopanayanigamanany avayavah. he refersto the Nyaya definition of the thesis (pratiina) at pST1136,11-4d148a cf. nS1.1.33sadhyanirdesh pratiina), that of the reason at 114,14b1-2,150a3 (cf. nS1.1.34&5udaharanasadharmyat sadhyasadhanamn hetuh, tatha vaidharmyat), that ofthe example at psT113-4,116a2,146a6-7,144(cf. nS1.1.36sadhyasadharmyottaddharmabhavi drstanta udaharanam), and that of the applicationupanaya) at psT
The japanese association of Indian and buddhist Studiesareporton the study of sanskrit Manuscript of the pramanasamuccapatika chapter3 (S. katsuRa)(167)150a7-b1(cf. nS1.1.8:udaharanapeksas tathepy upasamharo na tatheti va sdhyasy-ppanayah).he does not refer to the definition of the conclusionnigamama).jinendrabuddhi refers to and discusses the four kinds of siddhanta at pST113b6-1143caturvidhas c siddhantah. sarvatamtrasiddhantuh prafitantrasiddhunto 'dhikaranasid-dhanto 'bhyupagamasiddhantas ca.... (cf. nS1.1.28-31).he also enumerates the fourkinds of hetvabhasa at pST1503-4vyabhicaraviruddhaprakaranasamasudhyasamati-takala hetvabhosah (cf. nS1.. kulatita hetvobhasah).Finally, dignaga refers to NS5(pratijnahetvor virodhah pratiinavirodhah) as the nyaya definition of "incompatibil-ity between the thesis and the reason'ivoS36as well as in his earlier work onBuddhist logic, i.e., the Nvayamukha (Taisho 1628,p.la25).it is clear that the buddhistlogicians are well informed about the nyaya system of proof.(3)vaisesika
From other chapters of the pSv we know that dignaga is acquainted with some versio1of the vaisesikasutra (hereafter vS) that does not exactly correspond to the currentlyavailable versions of the vs.5)Iconnection with inference/proof, dignaga refers to vs3.1.12visani tusmad asvahivoS342a, while jinendrabuddhi partially quotes VS9.18svedomi kuram kuranam at PsT151b4.However, when dignaga criticizes thevaisesika theory of proof, he cites and examines in detail one particular sutrc that is notfound in any available version of vs, that is: tadaddharmasya hetuh reason is [atatement] of a property of tadvat")4) this sutra presupposes the definition of the thesis:sadhyoktih pratiina thesis is a statement of that which is to be proven".)wheni frst encountered the above fact, i was excited but soon realized that nearlyyears ago prof. dr. hattori Masaaki had published "prasastapada and dignaga, anote onthe development of the vaisesika Theory of anumana,26)in which he had discussed thesame materials. he says:"in the third chapter of the Pramanasamuccaya, dignaga quotes from a certain vaisesika treatise adefinition of the logical reason (hetu), which runs: tatadtharmasybhichanami) hetuh「eason is (a statement) of a property of taduat. From dignaga's explanation, it is known that thisdefinition was preceded by a definition ofthe proposition (pratiin)propositionis a statementof that which is to be proved. In reference to this latter, the rather ambiguous term taohat is understood as meaning sudhyavaf, that which possesses the sadhu-dharma), i.e., the subject ofa prop-ositiontharmin).alsois, chap. iv, a vaisesika definition ofthe example (drstunta) is quoted,most probably from the same treatise, as: ubhayaprasiddho drstontchexample is that in
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies(168)areporton the study of sanskrit Manuscript of the pramanasamuccayatiku chapter 3 (S. Katsura)which both (the sadhyadharma and the reason) are well known (to be present or absent).Neither the title of the vaisesika work from which dignaga quoted, nor the name of the author otthat work, is given by dignaga or by his commentator jinendrabuddhi. However, we know fromthese quotations that the vaisesikas built up their theory of the syllogism before dignaga's time,giving a definition to each member of the syllogism. our sources for the study of the early vaisesi-ka system are very scanty, and we can hardly ascertain in which period the vaisesika came to fommthis theory. it is not traceable in the vaisesikasutra. The definition of the proposition is virtuallyidentical with that foundin nyayasutra. however, this does not necessarily mean that the vaisesikatheories as referred to by dignaga are older than the nyayasutra. The existence of a series of vais-esika works attested by mallavadin and his commentator simhasuri, who is supposed to have livednot much later than dignaga, seems to show that the school tradition of the vaisesikas was keptwithout intemnuption up to the time of dignaga. if the more advanced theory of the syllogism hadbeen fommulated, priorto dignaga, by the vaisesikas, dignaga ought to have referred to it. Thus, itmay be reasonable to consider that the theories which dignaga takes up for criticism were main-tained by the contemporary vaisesikas."I have nothing to add to or change inprof. hattori's arguments. The only improvementican make is to report that jinendrabuddhi has ukti instead of abhidhana to be supplied inthe vaisesika definition of the reason under discussion. prof. hattori simply followed muniJambuvijaya's Sanskrit reconstruction of this portion of the PSV that is unbelievably accu-rate.27)
4.Now i would like to review dignaga's own views on the thesis and the reason. First ofall, for him the thesis or "presentation of that which is to be inferred" (anumeyanirdesa) isnot a positive member of proof as it is for the naiyayikas but rather presents the target ofthe reason, it is what is to be presented as the thesis and nothing else, it is what the propo-nent actually wishes to prove, following vasubandhu's lead in the vadavidhana, and it isnot what is contradicted by the perceived state of affairs, inference, verbal testimony oronvention. or dignaga, a reason such as smoke is a property (dharma) of that whichis to be proven sdhya),i.e., the topic of the thesis (paksa), such as a mountain regarding which the proponent wants to prove the existence of a hidden fire.9)1)atle ofleaves. askrit manuscripfs inibet, their psf and their future. amsterdam:royal netherlands academy of arts and Sciences, p.39,2004.(http://www.knaw.nl/publicatiepdf/20041012pdf)2)emnst Steinkellner. Helmut krasser and horst lasic. (eds.). jinendrabuddhis pramanciamuccayatiko, chapter i. part l: critical edition, part ii. diplomatic edition. beijing-vienna
The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudiesaReponton the study of sanskrit Manuscript of the pramanasamuccayatika chapter 3 (S. katsuRa)(169)(2)"pramanasamuccay. Revisited," international journal of buddhist thought andChina tibetology Publishing house-voaw.2005.3)dignaga's pramanasamuccaya, chapter 1a hypothetical reconstruction of the sanskrittext). ikG,〓pp.(-format) (www.oeaw.ac. atias/Mat/dignaga ps1pdf).4)"The sastitantro perception,a collection of Fragments," asiatische studientdes asi-tiques vol. 53,pp.667-678,1999.5)Ilcaav tokyo2(http:/fikga.oeaw.ac.at/matpramana s tika.pdf).6)〓a study of sataimirin dignaga's definition of pseudo-perception1.7cd-8ab)," wiener zeitschrifi fir die kunde sidasiens, bd. xLvili, pp.11149,2004.〓ndignaga's Theoryof the object of cognition as presented in(v)," journal of the internationl associatioobuddhisf studies, volume29-2,pp.211253,206(2008).7)(1)"a hot dispute about lukewarm air. dignaga on aptavada," piotr balcerowicz (ed.).logic amd belief inindichilosophy. warsw indological studies 3. delhi: motilal banarsi-dass, pp.521-537,200culture 13,pp.7-22,2009.8)ernst steinkellner et al (eds.), sanskrit mamuscripts inchina. proceedings oa panel at the〓 beijing seminartibetum studies, october117.beiing,2009,pp.155-168.9)(1)〓svarupa and visesin dignaga's Theory of paksabhusa" japanese:デイグナーガのpaksabhasa説-svarupaとvisesaによる分類について-),journalof indicm aabuddhisf studies55-1:pp.422-429,2006(2)〓sapaksa," journolofindicm d buddhis studies, vol.56-3, pp.111151,2008.(3)"controversies regarding the proof for the existence of purusa vasubandhu, the yuktidipiku, and uddyotakara" in japanese:プルシヤの存在論証を巡る論争),The annals of theresearchproiect center for the compararive studty ologic(比較論理学研究),vol.5,pp63-77.2008.
(4)〓a controversy between dignaga and sannkhyas on the existence of pradhand" n japa-nese:ディグナーガとサーンキヤ学派との論争ープラダーナの存在論証を巡って-).journalofindticn ad buddhist studies, vol.57-1, pp.291-295.2008.(5)"bhartrhari, dignaga and the epimenides paradox" read at the international conference〓 logic, navya-nyaya & applications;a homage to bimal krishna Matilal held in kolkata inJanuary07.
10)watanabe, "dharmakirti's criticism of amipratva in the samnkhya theory" and Shiga, "Remnarkson the origin of all-inclusive pervasion.11)or vinaivety avadharveta.12)or upadrstas.13)quoted at pST163al.14)kanakavarman: asarvavakyam istam vasudhararaksita.15)cf. Muni jambuvijaya, yaisesikasutraof kanuda, baroda196,appendix.16)jambuviiaya, op. cit., p.197,fn.1: samuhasyaiva dharmah syat.
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studies(170)aReport on the study of sanskrit Manuscript of the pramanasamuccayatiko chapter3 (S. katsura)20)pSVo3.6b,a variant reading: tayoh sambandhinidarsanamn drstantah. See Frauwallner,17)quoted at psT152b3.18)pST113 vadavidhau sudhyobhidhanam pratijnalaksanam. vicaranaycm isto 'rthahpaksah. cf. e. Frauwallner, "vasubandhu's vadavidhih," wiener zeitschrif fir die kunde sd-udostasiens. bd. i,1957,p.33.19)see frauwallner, op. cit., p.34.op. cit., p.34.21)PSvo3.27:yat tv acaryenasankyoktam-sanghata antara/nantara evamn tatha na syuhpararthaka iti, pSTb1318al: bhavatu kevalasya sanghatatvasya vinuddhatvam. yada tvantaratvasahitam prayuijyate, yad asankyacaryavasubandhuna-"sanghata antara evam tatha nasyuh pararthakah" ity uktam, tada katham tasya viruddhatvam ity aha-yatty acaryenoktamityadi.
22)See his article (3)mentioned in the above note9.23)See e.g. Shoryu katsura, "dignaga's criticism of the vaisesika theory ofinference""in japa-ese:ヴァイシェーシカ学派の推理論に対するディグナーガの批判),tetsugaku(哲学),Vol.33,pp.51-66.1981,24)See pSvo3.39c' &34a and pST10b2.25)See pST150b226)wiener zeitschrif fur die kunde sudasiens, vol. Xvi,1972,pp.169-180.27)see note 15above.28)PS3.1cd-2: tatranumeyanirdeso hetvarthavisayo matah svarupenaiva nirdesyah svayamisto'nirakrtah /pratyaksarthanumanaptaprasiddhena svadharmini29)pS3.8ab: sadhyadharmo yato hetus tadubhasas cabhuysa(This research is supported bya Grant-in-aid for scientific Researcho from jsps)(Key words) dignaga, jinendrabuddhi, pramancsamuccayatika, manuscript study(professor, Ryukoku university, phd. dlitt)
