The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudiesDharmakirti's argument over the Universalin the Third chapter of the pramanavarttika, vv.11-50NotakE Mivako0.〓pramanavartikaiii1-63dharmakirti addresses dignaga's declaration that there artwo means of knowledge because there are two kinds of obiect. In vv.1-5he definesthese two kinds: the particular (svalaksana) and the universalamanyalaksana). Hestates four criteria that distinguish themvv. 1b,-c1, 2),demonstrates the unreality of themniversal (150),and states that the particular is its opposite(5lab) and the only trueobiect of knowledge (-54)we see here the first organised explanation in the buddhist epistemological school of thedifferences between the two kinds of object. in this paper i shall first review the argumentconcerning the universal invii1-50 and, in particular, its relation with the four crite-ria, then i shall consider the meaning of this argument in relation to that of the two kinds ofobiect.
1.as Tosaki [1979]has pointed out, vv. 11-5claim the non-existence of the universal.2The argument there can be understoodto correspond to the four criteria that distinguish thetwo kinds ofobject, statedin vv. 1b-c1, 2 The four criteria are(i) whether ornotan ob-iect has efficacity, (ii) whether it is similar or not, (iii) whether it is the obiect or not theobject of a word, (iv) whether or not the cognition arises, when the causes other [than theobject itself] are present. according to these criteria, the universal can be defined as(1)that which has no efficacity, (2)that which is similar,(3)that which is the obiect of aword, and (4) that whose cognition arises from causes other [than its own existence]. Inthe discussion invv.11-50,these four points appear in the order(3),(2),(4),and (1),as the evidences for the claim that the universal does not exist, which we can fnd in vv.11-40,4-447,ad,respectively. the whole argument can be summarised asfollows. The numbers in round brackets show the corresponding criteria.vv.11-The universal is non-existent because it is the obiect of the word (ii.vv.41The universal is non-existent because it is similar (ii).
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiSt Studiesvv.45-47The universal is non-existent because its cognition arises from causes other[than its own existence](i).vv.4-5the universal is non-existent because it has no efficacity (i).Ishall consider these points again, but first another analysis ofthe division of the argumentmust be examined.2.tosaki analyses the argumentin vv.11-50into 7sections with7reasons for the non-ex-istence of the universal.4 his analysis differs in two respects from that which i have pro-posed. Firstly, he analyses vv.11-40as comprising three separate arguments with threedifferent reasons. The three reasons are: (a) that the universal is the obiect of the word(vv.11-24),(b) that the universal cannot be expressed as identical with or different fromthe individual (vv.25-38),and (c) that the universal is the object of a cognition of thesame kind as that ofan absence  (vv.39-40).Secondly, in vv.48- he finds two argu-ments with two different reasons, namely (d) that the form of the universal does not ap.pear in its cognition vv.48-49),and (e) that the universal lacks efficacity (v.50).His division is the result of his effort to reflect the seven characteristics of the universa.suggested by devendrabuddhi and Manorathanandin. in their comments on v.5lab, theverse which says that the particular is that which is contrary to the [universal] as explained, they enumerate the seven characteristics of the particular as the opposites of thoseof the universal stated in the preceding discussion." Manorathanandin further adds that thecharacteristics of the universal that are opposite to those of the particular serve [ndhar-makirti's discussion] to establish the non-existence of the universal. it is not wrong tocount these characteristics in dharmakirti's argument as those of the universal and to un-derstand them to be serving in some way as the reasons for asserting the non-existence ofthe universal, but to understand the context by dividing the argument according to theseseven points is debatable, 9) for, as we shall see, of these some of these characteristics arsnot truly distinct. Furthermore, when we understand the argument thus, the meaning of thefour criteria shown in the beginning of the argument blurs.3.in brief the problems that arise in dividing vv.11-50according to the seven characteris-tics of the universal are as follows. first, tosaki analysed vv.48-5as comprising (d) and(e), but since the claim of (e) is based on that of (d), these verses are better construed asa single continuous argument.1〓/ the subject there is that the universal is non-existent be-cause it has no efficacity, which then corresponds to the first criterion of the four. (See
The japanese association of Indian and buddhiStStudiessectionl above.) tThe same holds for vv.11-40(a) vv.11-24,(c)wv.39-40,and alsovv.34-38, which are included in(b)in Tosaki's division, can be considered to have thesame subiect. The subiect there is that the universal is non-existent because it is the obiectof the word,11) which cotresponds to the third criterion.It is true, however, that within vv.11-40,vv.25-33are discussing something differentIn the beginning of this section, in vv.25-27b,dharmakirti argues that a universal is nonexistent because it can neither be identical with nor different from an individual. This reasoning for the non-existence of the universal differs from that which we have seen above invv.11-2ad4-40.but we see almost the same reasoning appearing againin vv.41-44in the argument for the same claim. The difference between the two sets of arguments isthat dharmakinti presents vv.41-44more clearly as corresponding to the second criterionfor distinguishing the two kinds of object. Moreover, after vv.25-27b, from v.34othe argument for the non-existence of the universal from the fact that it is the object of aword resumes. it would therefore be better to take vv.25-33as derivative arguments appearing in the series of arguments corresponding to the third criterion. verses28-33ex-plain what the universal is: the universal, which has been demonstrated in vv.25-27b tchave no nature, is stated in v.28to be just the result of conceptual construction, and v.29states that it is an error to think that the universal has its own nature or that a thing is [iden-tical with] it. Thus, the arguments in vv.25-33are claiming that the universal does not exist and that to think that it does is mistaken. This argument must have been inspired by thepreceding arguments, those in vv.19-24, which criticise the doctrine of the brahmanicalrealists that existent universals are the obiect of words.13)4.In the previous sections I have proposed to divide the argument into vv.11-4,41-44and4-,and shown that each corresponds to one of the criteria. verses 4-47,whichhave not been mentioned above, explain that the cognition of the universal arises in depen-dence on verbal convention, or, when the cognition is not accompanied by a word, theproximity between the things. Thus vv.4-47claim that the cognition of the universalarises from causes other than the universal itself, and so correspond to the fourth criterion.Thus we can see the argumentin vv.11-50s proving the universal's being non-existenton the basis of its other four characteristics indicated in the four criteria. we can under-stand that dhammakinti's argument serves to attack the doctrine of those realists who holdthat the universal exists,14) as well as to promote his own theory. it would be useful, in or-
The japaneSe asSociation ofIndian and buddhiStStudies174)dhammakinti's argument over the universal in the Third chapter of the pramanavarttika, w.11-50(M. Notake)der to understand the characteristics of this argument, to consider how it appears when wesee that it is criticism of the realists' position.5.as we have seen, the characteristics of the universal discussedin the first two argumentsin vv.11-40and vv.41-44, are its being the object of the word and its being common.These are the characteristics of the universal accepted both by dharmakirti and by the real-ists. but the former found them incompatible with the additional characteristic ascribed touniversals by the latter, namely their being existent: in vv.11-4he demonstrates the con-tradictions that arise if the object of verbal cognition is real, and, in vv.41-4, that commonality, if it existed, could have no relation with individuals.〓n the other hand, the characteristics that dharmakirti ascribes to the universal invv4-50are those that the realists would not accept. he states in vv.4-47that the cognitionof the universal arises from other causes [than itself], and in wv.48-50that the universalis never seen and so has no efficacity. These arguments can be seen to share the same basicview against the realists' position that the universal produces its own cognition. UsingDhammakirti's own temms, we may say that he is refuting the realists' view that the univer-sal has efficacity.6.In short, in vv.11 dharmakirti is criticising the view that the universal. which is theobject of the word, exists and has efficacity. For him the real is the efficacious, and by thiscriterion only the particular qualifies.1) it was necessary for him, in order to distinguishthe particular and the universal, to refute the view that something common, which is themost basic characteristic of the universal, can exist with efficacity. The argument in vv11-50can therefore be said to support his theory of the distinction between the two kindsof obiect.
*This paper is part of the result of a dfg project caried out with prof. eli franco (leipzig),inwhich we are preparing a critical edition and english translation of pv1-63.I gratefully ac-knowledge the support of the dFG and the help derived from discussion with my collaborator.lwish also to express my deep gratitude to prof. alexis Sandersonll Souls college, oxford) foris valuable suggestions in understanding the text and for his kind help with the revising of myEnglish.
1)In this paper i translate both sumanya and samanyalaksang as "universal.' Dhammakirti usesthese two terms without any difference of intention. it is true as prof. Yoichi Fukuda pointed outin responding to my paperin the618conference for the jaibS, that dharmakirti tends to use the
The japanese sSociation of Indian and BuddhistStudiesdharmakinti's argument over the universalin the Third chapter of the pramanavarttika, wv.11-50M.Notake)(175)〓
word samanualaksana when he has dignaga's words in his mind, asi3d and bI16but we also see the term used in explaining his own theory, asinv5.The fact is, however.that he almost always uses the term samanya, and that there are only a small number of places inhis entire work where he uses the word samanyalaksana. i am grateful to prof. Fukuda for hishelpful comment.2)see Pvp16711, hiromasa tosaki, bukkyoninshikiromo kenkyu(仏教認識論の研究).vol.1. tokyo: daitoshuppansha,1979,p.120,fn.14.Dharmakirti's own remarks whickappear in each argument assure this. See pviii1la,27b,43ab, 50.3)pvii,chakpyasaknitch arthakriyayam drsasadrsatac ca visayovisayatuatchsabdusyamyamimittanum bhave dhisadasattvatah.4)tosaki [197971-120].5)a literal translation of tosaki's words, which I find do not make good sense, would be thalthe universal is the obiect of the manifestation which is the same as the cognition whose obiectis an absence'(「無」を対象とする知と同じ顕現の対象).his interpretation is on the basisof his emendationofpvv130.23on the particular. Seen.7.6)In considering the division of the argument, tosaki also consulted devendrabuddhi's syllo-gisms that summarise the arguments, and comments on the change of subiect. See for instance.Tosaki [197987,fn.62,3,fn.1.7)pvp67a27-b1,pvv13020-25 yathoktot samanyad viparitam yat tat svalaksan-mmucyate. idum vaiparityam. anabhidheyatvam, tattvanyattvabhym vacyatvam, asadarr-hapratibhasavisistapratyayavisayatvm(em., cf. Pvp67a2-317*asadari-hapratyayavisistapratibhas-vvmcasadarthapratyayavisistapratibhasa- pvvmc**,asadharanatuam, samketasmarananapeksapratipattikatvam, anyaripaviviktasvarupapratibhasa-vattvam, arthakriyaksamatvam c.*medpi don snang bai (em. : shang bpd) khyad parmedpt (em. : medp, med prd)shes p'i yulm.**Tosaki [1979:104fn.101]:anasadarthapratyayouisisfapratibhasavisayatua8)PVv130226.
9)tosaki confesses awkwardness in dividing the sections according to the explanations in vand pv (see tosaki [197915,fn.102,108,fn.107]).however, the point that he foundproblematic is different from that to which i am drawing attention in this paper. See tosaki1979120.fn.144].10)See pv21.19,Vv30.16.11)verses34-38claim that the universal. the referent of the word. cannot be real. since wordsan refer to things that no longer exist or that do not yet exist, things, that is, of which existentuniversals could not be properties. verses 39-40assert the same by pointing out that verbal cog-nition is observed in respect both to things that exist and to things that have ceased to exist. invv.11-18dhammakirti is criticizing the concept of names (naman) held by the vaibhasikasThey think that names exist apart from sounds, and that the speaker's intention ca be convevedonly through names. dharmakirti criticises this view by taking it to mean that the referent of a
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studies(176)dhammakinti's argument over the universalin the Third chapter of thepramanavarttika, wv.11-50(m. notake)word is an existent name. what is refuted in this criticism is the existence of the obiect of theword. whether or not the referent is a common property is not the point of the discussion. as forwv.19-24. seen.14.12)the stnucture of the argument in wv.25-27band wv.41-4,and the reasons used there, arebasically the same. both passages proceed in the following way: the universal cannot be identicalwith an individual, because the universal is common whereas the individual cannot be so, noican they be different, because in that case there would be no relation between them. Therefore,the universal has no own nature. in the case ofthe argumentin vv.41-44, however, dhammakirtiadds a line in v.43ab that indicates the second criterion: "therefore, nothing but the universal'snature of being common is the mark ofits being unreal.'13)See n.14.
14)dhammakirti explicitly attacks the doctine of the existence of common properties in the fol-lowing places. in23he counters the theory, maintained by such realists as the naiyayikasand vaisesikas, that universals exist independently of individuals and are the obiects of words.verse24 is directed against opponents such as the bhatta mimamsakas who hold thatuniversals,he referents of words. are real and one with individuals.15)see pv3, also shoryu katsura (2002)," sonzai towa nanika." bukkyyo bunkakenkynio kiyo〓
(仏教文化研究所紀要)41:264-265.abbreviations of text-titles: nbnvayabindu, pvpramanavarttika, pvapramanavorttikolankara. pvpramamavarttikapanika, pvvpramanavorttikavrtti.<Key words) dhamakirti, pramanavartika, samanya, samanyalaksana, universal,普遍,一般相(researcher of the dfG, university ofleipzig, m.a.)
