The  uapaneSe sSociationofindian and buddhiStStudiescomparative studies of bruno petzold and haniiroTominaga on buddhism and GoetheKotani Yukio
we cite, first of all,the comparison of zen with Tendai in the english essay, " buddhistMeditation" of bruno petzold:Therefore the fundamental rule of tendai practice is that whoever gives himself up to meditationmust direct his regard into his own ordinary mind, as it is nearest and most certain to us. This prac.tice, however, as our earlier statements have made clear, is very different from the introspectioninto our own heart that is practiced by the zen School and could be summarized by the followingverse from goethe's Faust, Partii. actiiiLass der Sonne verschwinden,let the sun's brilliance disappealwenn es in der Seele tagt.provided the day is dawning in the soul.wir imeignen herzen finden,we find in our own heartwas die ganze welt versagt.what the whole world refuses to usThe originality of the tendai meditation, distinguishing it fromen meditation, consists consequently in a twofold of reaching knowledge. discursive thought, or the seizing and perceptionotundamental truth by the intellect, here is joined organically with intuition, and intuiton with discur-sive thought. in both, logic is active, but in different ways. in considering Tendai meditation, we arsconfronted with neither a logic void of intuition nor an alogical intuition, we face a vehicle that ad-vances on the two wheels of conceptual thought and pure both keptin smooth motionby logic thatovercomes all friction.Before this passage there are 2oarticles of the comparative study oZen and Tendai. weextract three noticeable ones from them1.Zen is mere vitalism, based on the urge of life and on our immediate inner experience. tendaicombines with the urge of life and our immediate inner experience. The idea of life considers thatall depends not only on life but also on our thought on life.3.Zen takes its stand only on the irrational, rejecting the rational. tendai says that the rational is theirational, the irrational the rational, both coinciding in the end. That whereby we picture to our-selves the world is itself the substance of the world.
The uapanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies208)comparative studies of bnuno petzold and haniiro tominagaon budchism and goethe ( y. kotanl)17.zen sees everywhere only the continuous, eternally gushing, flowing and shoreless stream oflife and maintains an antitheoretical, systemless attitude towards the world. its experience is mereecstasy, mere vanishing of one's individualty into a boundless existence. tendai demonstrates thewill to establisha system and represents a theoretical world view. its experience is intellectual intuition.
In the first half of the Showa period, or during and after the wartime more than hundredsand scores of disciples devoted themselves to the lectures of haniiro tominaga(富永半次郎),chic and sincere private scholar. in the earliest numbers of the monthly transcript oflectures, " ichi," about which i reported in this Japanese association of indian and buddhistStudies last year, he referred to the rise of Zen in relation to Tendai. we summarize thesecircumstances. The method which the so-called Zen-sect elected was that of avoiding ordisliking our intellectual posture, such as is symbolized by "no expression with letter.' andthere were reasonable historical causes. in short, when we come intellectually to a dead.lock, there are possibilities of breaking the deadlock as a product of our efforts, as a ger-man proverb "distress breaks iron" shows. Since the six dynasities of china various kindsof lndian buddhism entered disorderly into china. in course of time they had to put thenin order since the first half of the six dynasties, while the intetpretations of sutras becameactive, they resulted finally inan evil influence of scholastics...Shichiro chidani(千谷七郎)(1912-1992),a psychiatrist and one of the chief disciplesof Tominaga delivered his second lecture in marbach a. n. on "der buddhismus im lichteder philosophie von klages -ein versuch, die ursprungliche lehre des buddha herauszuschalen-. (The buddhism viewed from the philosophy of ludwig klages, an essay,to sift out the core of primordial doctrines of buddha).The main themes are as follows:1.problems of nirvana-buddhism2. Schism's history of buddhist samgha (orders) andclues to the primordial buddha's doctrines 3. the significance of king asoka's edicts thehistory of buddhism.The significance "lotus-sutra proper" in the history of buddhism5.The origin of nirvana-thought, which klages criticized severely.6. sramana Gautama7.His Enlightenment under the bo-tree 8. the meaning of his obtaining the state of death-lessness orimmortality 9.the origin ofthe contemplation offive skandha 10. The meaningof panca kkhanda anicca and anatta11. The death of buddha12.buddha and Nature. chi-dani concluded. klages criticized buddhism very severely and incisively stating that it wasnothing but nirvana-thought itself. in section1. , he interpreted, following his Master tom-inaga's view, reinterpreted tendai and zen, as follows.
The japanese association of Indian and Buddhist Studiescomparative studies of bruno petzoldand hanjiro tominaga on buddhism and Goethe (y. kotani)(209)Following his Master tominaga's views, prof. chidani interpreted Tendai and Zen inanother passage of this essay: Though the Mahayana buddhism regarded, except lotus-sutraproper, took all things for empty as well as for existent (the idea of both 'existence andempty')(亦有亦空),or "neither existence nor emptiness' (dual negation)(非有非空),it named its own perfection in wisdom (prajnaparamita),strangely enough, "the last orhighest Nirvana." one could think that Mahayana buddhism is nothing but a rebirth of theancient Upanishad philosophy. Finally mahayana buddhism reached the highest scholasticclimax in the doctrine of the mutual correlation of the emptiness(空),the temporality(假and the middle(中)of Tendai-daishi, the greatest scholar of chinese buddhist scholars. ishould like to conceive the prosperity of the Zen-sect to be a contemporary reaction of theChinese predominantly practical disposition against the then strongly scholasticized textu-alism of the Mahayana buddhism, so that the zen-sect came to hold an extra odinarilystrong antipathy for all the written faith(不立文字).The lecturer arranged almost all the contents of this lecture, mainly the two siftings outof the cores of buddha's doctrines and of the lotus Saddharma-pundarika) sutrproper,which owes to the accomplishments of his teacher, tominaga, to make them more comprehensible for the audience of klages-Gesellschaft (society).Goethe's articles of No.160of plane und Entwurfe zumaust (plans and projects foiFaust) were replanned, especially from post that of leiche (conpse), so that articles from〓cpo. himmel (sky) till gericht uber (judgement on) Faust are annexed. Seeing this,we can understand that the poet laid chiefly emphasis on the scenes after the hero's deathand that this sixth scene is the "abschlub (closing) of the whole volume of Fust. whatwas promised in the beginning prologue in heaven, was a bet between the lord and Me-histopheles on the soul after the death of the hero. its decision was expected to be bothZweck" (aim) and motive" (motif).The most indispensable was this very scene, which had the sixth scene, dcpo him-mel as its closing point. one should call, so to say, a finishing point, completing the eyesof a painted dragon. it is eliminated completely in the renewed faust. This is no trivialmatter, and a marvellous accident. The authof himself calls it, however, a great success ofthe Fsf-creation. So that one can do nothing but to regard the poet as a madman. if onecannot treat such an excellent man as Goethe as an insane, one must come precisely intoquestion to this point, which one should call an excessive solicitude of Goethe. Thatis das
The japanese asSociation of Indian and buddhist Studies(210)comparative studies of bnuno petzold and haniiro tominaga on buddhism and goethe (y. kotani)Neuere" (the newer) writtenin his last letter to w.v.Humboldt(17,3.1832).and its con-crete, point-blank expression is the following trenchant passage, showing his wonderfuldexterity,
MephistophelesUnd hat mit diesem kindisch-tollen ding,der klugerfahrne sich beschaftigt,so ist fuihrwahr die torheit nicht gering,Ifto this childish-fatuous spreeone so experienced could descend,Thenno mean folly itmust beThat seizedupon himin the end.(trans. w. Amdt)Die seiner sich am Schlub bemachtigt.(11840-11843)this very four-line verse is an explication beyond explication, a reason beyond reason(by the way) this change, thoughit was drastic, was not concrete, but incomporeal or rathera subconscious one, that is to say, as a human mental action of "vernunft" (reason) andverstand"" (understanding).to put it now briefly, one could nearly rewrite that the dispo-sition of self-adherence disappeared. Such a phenomenon is so rare in mankind, that aneven extremely unusual experienced man expresses so, by means of his experiences withthe background of the day, because of its unprecedentedness, for convenience's sake, inmost cases figuratively. of all few examples, one of the most critical changes is Goethe'sverstand-like in His last days, seems to correspond (psychologically) to one of the twcmain sermonic words of Sakya-buddha in his last days: " ayu-samkharo ossattho."Bnuno petzold: buddhist meditationThe transaction of the asiatic society of japan, seriesv.1.1948)
Hanjiro tominaga: shakabud hongi yorony supplementary Essay on Royal biography ofbuddha), vol.4,1956,pp.331-462.j.w.v. goethe: atragedy translated by walter amdt, new York/london: w.w. nortonCompany,1976,p.300.Hanjiro tominaga: shogaku mi tsmite (on sambodhi of sakya buddha), tokyo: shogaku nitsuite-Shakusonno bukkyo kanko kai,1984,p.137<key words)zen and tendai, biocentric, ayu-samkharo ossattho, goethe's new faust(professor emeritus, rissho university)
