 Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007
(51)
The Vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the Amrta Distribution and its Exploitation by the Pusa chutai jing's Authors
Elsa LEGITTIMO
Introductory notes
The present paper discusses the means employed by the authors of the Pusa chutai
jing for conferring an altered message regarding events and motives that occur in the Vimalakirtinirdesa. It further includes a comparative study on the asta-vimoksa
concept in relation to food or drink.
Whereas the Vimalakirtinirdesa, the key topic of this year's Congress of the
Japanese Association of Indian and Buddhist Studies, is still at the crest of its fame, the Pusa chutai jing (TheSutraheldbythebodhisattvawithinthewomb菩薩處胎經)1)
belongs to a once influential and now forgotten genre of Buddhist literature.2) Just before entering nirvana the Buddha recalls in this sutra the very first exposition he held in his mother's womb and creates a great womb palace for his auditors. A cer- tain parallelism exists with Vimalakirti's empty house or sick-room that accommo- dates a huge assembly.
I. The Tathagata's food gift and the creation of golden-coloredbodhisattva(s)
The Vimalakirtinirdesa'schapter nine, the "Nirmitabhojananayanaparivarta"("The chapteronthe created/fictivfeood'sprovision"),3f)ocuses,on the amrta (sweetdew甘露)
given by Sugandhakuta the Sarvagandhasugandha
Vimalakirti, his fictive
Sugandhakuta Tathagata. The amrta is distributed to the beings of this world with-
out Sakyamuni Buddha's personal intervention.
Chapter four ("The Buddhatree" 佛樹) of the Pusa chutai jing relates to these
events in its final section on the special powers (rddhipada 神足) the Buddha ac- quired as a bodhisattva: 1) eye (divya-caksus),2) ear (divya-srotram),3) nose4),
Tathagata to the golden-colored fictive bodhisattva sent to universe by Vimalakirti. The main heroes of this play are
bodhisattva who brings back the precious food, and
1079
 The Vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the Amrta Distribution and (52) its Exploitation by the Pusa chutai jing's Authors (E. LEGITTIMO)
4) mouth,5) and 5) bodily power. Between the third and fourth power exists an apparentchapterclosing:Twelveyojanas of livingbeingsbecomeawakenedand ask to be reborn in the Gandhasugandha buddhaksetra (香積佛刹).6) Under the "mouth power" the text then states:
From Jambudvipa up to the eighteenth heaven, everybody sees the Tathagata eating. The bodhisattvas of the first stage up to the forth stage perceive the Tathagata's body's lapis lazuli throat. The bodhisattvas of the non-returning (avaivartika/anagamin 不 退轉) stage
up to the ninth stage perceive the strong and the ailing ones. The heavenly beings pick up the Tathagata's food, give it to all the other worlds, and there carry out buddha-activities (buddha-karya 佛 事). This is the retribution of the Tathagata's mouth power. The Tathagata showsthefood'staste,thetasteoftastes(rasarasagrata次第味味),7)the unmovable taste that is neither swallowed nor chewed. While liftingup the food towards his mouth the Tathagata concentrates his mind on thinking that the sentient beings of the five destinies inthetendirections,and alltheotherbeings,shalllikewiseexperience thistaste.When he thinks of them they all become full and satisfied.Like monks reaching the ninth dhyana stage whose minds are soft,beautiful and satiated.This is the bodhisattva mahasattva's pure and calm mouth power."8) Anotherrelevanptassageisfoundinthesutra'cshaptereleven("Feliciatnyu"modana
隨 喜).The Buddha has a golden body金 體) and holds an exposition for Usnisa-raja (頂 王)bodhisattva of the "Safe dwelling world"(安 住 世 界):
ByhisdivinepowerstheBuddhathentransformsthetrisahasra-mahasahasra lokadhatu
(one-billion-worlds)into shiny golden color. He makes those in the meeting see the world of joy where the bodhisattvas are sitting on seven-treasure lotus flowers. Their disciples and retinue are all in goldencolor. They feed on meditation(dhyana) and release [and take it] as their food and drinks.9)
The Pusa chutai jing's authors took over several themes and narrations from the Vimalakirtinirdesa. But they eclipsed the principal "heroes" and Sakyamuni Buddha is the sole "hero" responsible for the creation of golden-colored bodhisattvas. His food, respectively the satiating taste of it, is telepathically distributed from
Jambudvipa to the beings of all the other worlds.
II. An analysis of the asta-vimoksa concept in relation to food or drink
Within the Chinese Canonthe concept of the eight-foldliberation(asta-vimoks八a 解 1080
 The Vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the Amrta Distribution and its Exploitation by the Pusa chutai jing's Authors (E. LEGITTIMO)
脱)is seen in simile-like relation with: the eight-fold path, meditation
six abhijna powers, water of release, a pond, or something eatable or drinkable. This last combination is of significance for the topic of this paper. The few scrip- tures containing this theme can be classified into two categories: 1) the three ver-
sions of the Vimalakirtinirdesa10)and three Vimalakirtinirdesacommentaries,11) and 2) three texts translated by Zhu Fonian.
The simile like picture of the asta-vimoksa concept in relation to food appears twice in the Vimalakirtinirdesa:in chapter three ("Sravakabodhisattvavisarjanapras"nTa"h,e sravakasa'ndbodhisattvasr'efusaltoquestion[Vimalakirti]"a)nd inchapternine.
In chapter three the Buddha tells his worthy disciples to make a visit to Vimalakirti and to inquire about his health. One after the other, they refuse with reference to their past encounters and discussions with the virtuous man. Even Kasyapa refuses and explains that Vimalakirti had once criticized him:
HonorableMahakasyapaif, youcanwithoutoversteppingtheeightdepravitiesconcentrate on the eightliberationsi,f throughthe equalityof the depravitiesyoupenetratethe equal- ityofholiness,andifbythissinglericeball,youareabletosatisfyallthebeingsandto makeofferingstoalltheBuddhasandalltheholybeings,onlythenyoushouldeatyour- self.Theonewhoeatsinthiswayisneithersoilednornon-soiledn,eitherconcentrated, noroutof concentrationn,eitherintransmigrationn,orfixedinnirvana.12)
In chapter nine the assembly is at Vimalakirti's place. When the discussions on the
bodhisattvas' entry into the doctrine of non-duality (advaya)end, Sariputra worries about their lunch. Vimalakirti reading his mind tells him:
HonorableSariputra,the Tathagatataught the sravakas the eight-foldliberation.You shouldadhereto it andshouldnot listento the dharmawiththoughtsrelatedto material things.Howeveri,f youwant to eat, waita moment,and youwill eat foodyou havenever tasted before.13)
The set of texts translated by Zhu Fonian includes:the Antarabhavasutra (TheSutra on the Intermediate-State, Zhong yin jing 中陰經),14) the Pusa chutai jing and the Ekottarika-agama (Zengyi a hanjing 増 壹 阿含 經).15)
In the Antarabhavasutra the motive appears in a poem of chapter six ("Thedivine powers", rddhi pada 神足) spoken in praise of Subuddhi Tathagata:
1081
(53)
, nirvana, the
 The Vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the Amrta Distribution and (54) its Exploitation by the Pusa chutai jing s Authors (E. LEGITTIMO)
Among the devas and humans he is the most Honored One without comparison.
His light illuminates the sentient beings.
After having stayed for a long time hungrily and thirsty on the path, they drink by means of the eight-foldrelease.16)
In the Pusa chutai jing the particular combination is found at the end of chapter ten
("Permanenceand impermanencen"itya-anitya常無常) in a poem expounded by the Buddha:
Through the eight-fold liberation [I, the Buddha show/produce] the tasty juice of the sweet dharma-dew (甘露法味漿)making those who are thirsty and desirous to feel fully satis-
fied in an unthinkable way (acintya).17)
In the Pusa chutai jing and the Antarabhavasutra the metaphor appears in verses or
passages that are only loosely linked to narrative contents. Among Zhu Fonian's translations only the Ekottarika-agama sets the combination into a specific context:
Once, the Buddha and his disciples made their begging tour through a certain Brahmin's village, but did not obtain any alms, because Mara had told the villagers not to give anything to the sramamas. At that time the Buddha expounded the won- derful teaching on the nine things or concepts which should be considered as food. One of these is the food of the eight-fold liberation.18)
In this light the passages of the Vimalakirtinirdesa appear as reminiscences of these events. The authors of the Pusa chutai jing and the Antarabhavasutra were either influenced by the Ekottarika-agama or by the Vimalakirtinirdesa. Of some significance might be the fact that while the motive in question is employed for Sugandhakuta in the Vimalakirtinirdesa and for Subuddhi Tathagata in the Antarabhavasutra, the Ekottarika-agama and the Pusa chutai jing use it for Sakyamuni Buddha.
The Pusa chutai jing points to conservative counter-currents. The discussed motives and events help support its authors' Sakyamuni-centered worldview. Their copying procedures were motivated by their wish to correct passages they thought were diverging from their faith. The Tathagata's amrta distribution is one out of numerous examples found in the Pusa chutai jing that clearly show an effort to restore the Buddha Sakyamuni's omnipotence. The present paper is only a particular case study. Further important motives and themes, for example from the Lotus
1082
 The Vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the Amrta Distribution and its Exploitation by the Pusa chutai jing's Authors (E. LEGITTIMO)
sutra, underwent similar transformations.
(55)
Bibliography
LAMOTTE,Etienne, L'Enseignement de Vimalakirti (Vimalakirtinirdesa), 1987, Louvain-
la-Neuve.
LEGITTIMOE,lsa I.,Analysisof thePusa chutaijing 菩薩處胎經(T12, no. 384), Inter-
national College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies, PhD thesis, 2006, Tokyo. (publica- tion planned in the series Melanges Chinois et Bouddhiques of the Institut Belge des Hautes Etudes Chinoises, Bruxelles, in 2007)
THE VIMALAKIRTINIRDESA, Transliterated Sanskrit Text Collated with Tibetan and Chinese Translations, ed. by the Study Group on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature, The Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, Taisho University, Tokyo, 2004.
1) Cf. T12, no. 384, p. 1015a24-1058b25.
2)
On the basis of internal as well as external evidenceI showedin my doctoral thesis (cf.LEGITTIMO20,06)conductedonthissutra,thatitisnotaChinesecompositionand
was translated around the year 400 AD by Zhu Fonian (竺佛念).
3) Cf. THE VIMALAKIRTINIRDES2A0,04, p. 354-389. For the Vimalakirtinirdesa's
French translation cf. LAMOTTE1,987. Thispowerprobablybasesontheconceptofthepurenessofthenose(ghranaparisud-
dhya鼻 浄).
The passage also refers (with some distinctive deviation) to the first syllables of the ARAPACANAsyllabi, cf. T12, p. 1022a7-1022c13.
4) 5)
6) 7) 8) 9) 10)
11) ThethreecommentariesaretheWeimojingyiji維摩經義記(T85,no.2769,p.341c), the Jingming jing jijieguanzhong shu 浄名經集解關中疏 (T85, no. 2777, p. 487b) and the Jinming jing guanzhong shichao 浄名經關中釋抄 (T85, no. 2778, p. 532b).
12) Cf. THE VIMALAKIRTINIRDESA20,04, p. 90-91, and T14, no. 475, p. 540b6- 10.
13) Cf.THEVIMALAKIRTINIRDES2A0,04,p.354,andT14,no.475,p.552a5-8.
14) Cf.T12,no.385.ThissutraispresentlyinvestigatedbyProf.MarkBLUM(publica-
tion forthcoming).
15) Cf.theChineseEkottarika-agama(T2,no.125).AlthoughGautamaSamghadevais
Cf. T12, no. 394, p. 1022c8.
One of the thirty-two laksanas of a Buddha. Cf. T12, no. 384, p. 1022c24-1023a3.
Cf. T12, no. 384, p. 1032c25-28.
Cf. T14, no. 474, p. 522a, and p. 532a, T14, no. 475, p. 450a-b, and p. 552a, and T14, no. 476, p. 561c-562a, and p. 579a.
1083
 The Vimalakirtinirdesa's Narration on the Amrta Distribution and (56) its Exploitation by the Pusa chutai jing s Authors (E. LEGITTIMO)
mentioned as the translator, the greatest part of the collection (or the whole)as we know it today is (still) Zhu Fonian's. Terminological comparative inquiries showed that the Chinese Ekottarika-agama contains a great number of formulas and expressions exclu- sively found in works translated by Zhu Fonian. I plan to further investigate this topic in a study dedicated to the Chinese Ekottarika-agama. On this topic cf. also MIZUNO Kogen, 1956,p. 41-90.
16) Cf.T12,no.385,p.1065a5-6. 17) Cf.T12,no.384,p.1032a21-22. 18) Cf.T2,no.125,p.772b.
〈KeyWords〉 初期大乗,竺佛念,菩薩處胎経 Vimalakirtinirdesa, asta-vimoksa (Post-doctoralresearcher at the International Collage for Postgraduate Studies)
新刊紹介
Compiled by M. YAMAZAKI and Y. OUSAKA
INDEX TO THE MAJJHIMANIKAYA
本文473頁 ・定価35.50ポ ンド Pali Text Society 2006 年
1084
