 (64) Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007
An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarnaprabhasa Expressed and Intimated in the Drdha-parivarta
SUZUKI Takayasu
1.TheAimof ThisPaper:AContinuousVerificationoftheHypothesis Ashasbeenalreadyillustratedinaseriesofpreviousstudies,1t)heSuvarnapra- bhasa(SutraofGoldenLightS;uv),2o)neoftheMahayanaBuddhistscriptureswhich
has collectedand demonstratedvarious doctrinesand rites of both mundaneand supermundanleevels,andhas longhadwideinfluenceoverthewayof thinkingand livingofAsians,seemstohavebeenunderestimatedinsomecasesbythemodern scholarlyworldwithremarkssuchas"theSuvisameremiscellaneoumsedleyof doctrinesandrites"or "the featuresappearingin the Suvrepresenteithera tokenof the assimilationof Buddhisminto Hinduismor a token of the depravityof Buddhism."
In relationto this, thepresentauthorfocusingattentionon the complicatedstruc- tureoftheSuvandonthedescriptionintheCaturmaharajpaarivarta,3)has,partly supportedby somearcheologicarlesults,4a)lreadyproposedthe followinghypothesis ononeoftheintentionsofthecompilersoftheSuv:
〈The Hypothesis〉 Owing to the account of the Suv which has, through the several stages of its formation, collected and demonstrated various doctrines and rites of both mundane and supermundane levels already expounded in the treatises either of Mahayana,
of non-Mahayana, or of non-Buddhism (i.e., of Hinduism) before, the compilers and the proponents of the Suv became more able to lead their daily religious lives, including their practice of various rites and their attainment of various religious merits, in accordance with "the teaching of the Suv," that is, "the teaching of [Mahayana] Buddhism." We can therefore interpret the features appearing in the Suv not as a token of "the assimilation of Buddhism into Hinduism" or "the depravity of Buddhism," but as an attempt of Buddhists
to survive in the Indian religious world by emphasizing the value, the usefulness, and the completeness of [Mahayana] Buddhism to the proponents under circumstances where Hin-
1092
 An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarna rabhasa Expressed and Intimated in the Drdha parivarta ((T.SUZUKI)
(65)
duismhad becomemoreand moredominantoverBuddhism(duringand afterthe Gupta
period).Moreoveri,f oneof the intentionsof thecompilersof theSuv liesin this attempt bycollectingasmanydoctrinesandritesaspossible,howevemrundaneorsupermundane
theymightbe,fromthestageoftheformationoftheSuvcitothatoftheSuvc3consistent- ly,we mightbe ableto supposethat the intentionof the compilershas remainedunchanged all throughthe stagesof the formationof the Suv.Furthermorei,t mightturn out that the Suvisnot"ameremiscellaneoumsedleyofdoctrinesandrites,"butacollectionofthem whichis intrinsicto thevalueofthe Suv.
This paper continuously verifies this hypothesis by examining the Drdha-
parivarta(ChapterontheEarth-goddesDsrdha;Chapter185)oftheSuv),whichisthe fourth chapter in "the Five Chapters on the VariousGods and Goddesses."6)
2.ABriefSurveyoftheDrdha-parivarta (ChapterontheEarth-goddesDsrdha;Chapter 18)
We will begin with a brief survey of the Drdha-parivarta by dividing it approxi-
mately into five sections(from§1 to§5).
§1:The earth-goddess Drdha(堅 牢 地 神)makes an address in the presence of the
Lord Sakyamuni as. follows:
When the Suv is being expounded, the earth-goddess Drdha, together with her retinue,
will become stronger and more powerful. In their bodies there will be produced great
power, fortitude, and strength. Having gone up to the seat of the Law with invisible body, she will lean with her head upon the soles of the feet of the monks, nuns, laymen and lay- women who are preaching the Suv. After having been satisfied with the nectar juice of the Suv and having obtained great brilliance and strength, she will cause to increase the savor of the earth and make the earth stronger so that the various fruits and crops will be strong- er, more tasty and greater. All those beings that are dependent upon the earth will find increase and become great. Having become great, they will enjoy the various enjoyments and pleasures on earth such as various foods, drinks, and nourishment, these and similar varieties of blessings existing on the earth and dependent upon the earth. For this reason, all beings should show gratitude to her by means of listening to respectfully, honoring, and worshipping the Suv. By the hearing of the Suv they will have escaped from evil states such as hell and will have gained rebirth among gods and men in future time.
Wherever the various beings in various regions on the earth tell one another even a 1093
 An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarna rabhasa (66) Expressed and Intimated in the Drdhaparivarta ((T.SUZUKI)
single chapter or a single birth-story, even the name of a single Bodhisattva or Tatha-
gata, even a four-verse stanza or a single verse, or even the mere name of the Suv, all those regions of the earth will become stronger and more moist. The various savors of the
earth will increase for all the beings in those regions of the earth. All those beings will be blessed and will have great wealth and enjoyment. They will be devoted to liberality (danadhimuktani ca bhavisyanti). They will have faith in the Three Jewels of Buddhism (trisu ratnesv abhiprasannani bhavisyanti).(See Emmerick [1996:53-56])
§2:The Lord Sakyamuni tells the earth-goddess Drdha the merits of hearing and
honoring the Suv: Whatever beings may hear even a single verse from the Suv, they will transmigrate from this world of men and will be reborn among the groups of
gods. Whatever beings may honor the Suv by adorning their houses and covering them with even a single umbrella or a flag, those adorned houses will become
divine palaces made of the seven jewels. And when those beings transmigrate from this world of men, they will be reborn in those divine palaces seven times and will experienceinconceivabledivine blessings.(SeeEmmerick[1996:56-57])
§3:The earth-goddess Drdha makes a vow to protect the preachers of the Suv:
She will dwell in those regions of the earth where the preachers of the Suv have sat upon the seat of the Law, and with invisible body she will lean her head upon the soles of the feet of them so that the Suv, for the welfare of all beings, may long go forth in this world, so that beings may hear the Suv, so that they may in future time experience inconceivable divine and human pleasures (anagate 'dhvany...acintyani divyamanusyakasnuikhanipratyanubhaveyuh)s,othatthey maymeetTathagatas(tatha- gatasamavadhanagatacsabhaveyuh)s,othattheymayinfuturetimeawakentosu- preme and perfect enlightenment (anagate 'dhvanyanuttaram samyaksambodhim abhisambudheran)a,nd so that all the woes of hells and so on may be wholly cut off (sarvanaraka-tiryagyoni-yamalokaduhkhcaantiyantena samucchinnanibhaveyur). (See
Emmerick[1996:571)
The first Chinese version SuvC1 rendered by Dharmaksema(曇 無讖)in the 5th century (412-421), the second Chinese version SuvC2 combined by Bao-gui(寳 貴)in
597, the Sanskrit text Suvs, and the smaller Tibetan version SuvT1 conclude Chapter 18 with the end of this section.
§4:This §4 and the next §5 only exist in the larger Tibetan version SuvT2 and the
1094
 An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarna rabhasa ExpresasendIntimatientdheDrdhparivart(aTS.UZUKI)
third Chinese version SuvC3 rendered by Yi-jing(義 浄)in the year 703 .
(67)
The earth-goddess Drdha states that she holds a spell (snags,*mantra;gzunssnags, *dharani)which can bring about the welfare and blessing to all the divine and human
beings, and she gives instructions how to employ it involving the worship of those images (sku gzugs,*pratima)and stupas (mchodrten, *stupaor caitya7))in which the relics(rinbsrel,*sariraordhatu)ofthe Buddhaare deposited.Then sheadds instructions in another two spells that enable the beings to meet her and to be blessed by her. After these instructions she concludes her address insisting that her power of protectionandblessingoriginatesinthe ThreeJewelsofBuddhism(sansrgyasdkon
mchog dan chos dkon mchog dan dge 'dun dkon mchog, *buddharatna-dharmaratna- samgharatna).
§5:The Lord offers congratulations to the earth-goddess Drdha who protects the
Suv together with its preachers, and prophesies that she will obtain inconceivable merits by her act of protection.
The structure of Chapter 18 can be tabled as follows:
Table 1. The structure of the Drdha-parivarta (Chapter18)
We can see from Table 1 that the content of the Drdha-parivarta was enlarged through the two stages of formation.
Chapter 18:SuvC1(=SuvC2), SuvS, SuvT1 (the first stage)→SuvT2, SuvC3 (the second and last stage)
1095
 3
An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarnaprabhasa (68) Expressed and Intimated in the Drdha parivarta (T. SUZUKI)
. The Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarnaprabhasa Expressed and Intimated in the Drdha-parivarta
Having taken a brief overview, let us now return to the successive verification of the above-mentioned hypothesis by examining this Drdha-parivarta, paying careful attention not to overlook the intention of the compilers of the Suv expressed and
intimated in this chapter.
First, almost all of the religious merits this Chapter 18 refers to are not the ones
peculiar to Buddhism but nothing other than those merits which are mundane and
popular in India. The merits of hearing and honoring the Suv are, for example, to increase the savor of the earth, to make this circle of the earth moist with the moist
savor of the earth, to make the earth stronger so that the various plants and trees will grow stronger, to make all the various fruits and crops grow stronger, more fra-
grant, more tasty and greater so that those beings who have enjoyed those various drinks and foods will increase their longevity, strength, complexion, and senses, to
have great wealth and enjoyment, to escape from hell, the region of animals and the world of ghosts, and in future time to gain rebirth among gods and men. In contrast, only a few of the supermundane merits regarded as intrinsic to Buddhism are listed. The minority exceptions in this Chapter 18 should be at the most to meet Tathagatas and to awaken in future time to supreme and perfect enlightenment. This tendency
remains unchanged in the second and last stage since the merits attained by employing the several spells are such as to obtain prosperity, health, and longevity, and to be protected against enemies.
Second, suggested by the description in §1, there is high possibility that the
hearers or the proponentsof this chapter the compilers of the Suv had expected are those who were engaged in agriculture. To take some examples that reinforce this assumption, the beings who should be blessed by the earth-goddess Drdha are
described as "those beings who are dependent upon the earth (sattvaniprthivi-
samnisritani,Suvs124.4),"as those beings who "will perform the various numerous
hundreds of thousands of activities on earth (nanavidhaniprthivigatanyanekani
nanavidhanikaryasatasahasrankiarisyanti,Suvs122.13-14),a"ndasthosebeingswho
"willdoactsthathavetobedonewithpower(balakaraniyankiarmanikarisyanti
, Suvs
123.1)."On top of that, belief in "the earth-goddess" or "the spirit of the earth" that 1096
 An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarnaprabhasa ExpresasendIntimatientdheDrdhparivart(aTS.UZUKI)
brings about fertility is in general a very common one any time and anywhere among farmers. There seems thus considerable validity for this assumption.
Agricultural areas in India are said to have been very concerned about conven- tionalities, and the same is true of religious tradition; that is, in agricultural areas in India Hinduism has been predominant over Buddhism. If one of the intentions of
the compilers of the Suv, as proposed in the hypothesis, lies in an attempt to survive
in the religious world of India by emphasizing the value and the usefulness of [Mahayana] Buddhism to these proponents, this Chapter 18 (Chapter on the Earth- goddess Drdha) may have been compiled for emphasizing the value and the useful- ness of the Suv to those farmers in India who might have not been Buddhists at that time. This attempt was therefore, as it were, "to open up a new market." As well as the characteristics pointed out above that almost all of the religious merits this Chapter 18 refers to are not peculiar to Buddhism but popular and mundane, a de- scription in §4 suggesting that those people who should employ the spell for the welfare and blessing do not necessarily need to be Buddhists,8) may also serve to strengthen this assumption and consequently the hypothesis.
Third, in spite of the lack of laying stress of the merits intrinsic to Buddhism, the value of the Three Jewels(i.e. the value of Buddhism)is much emphasized and enhanced both in the first stage and in the second and last stage. What draw our attention here are the contexts in which the descriptions on the Three Jewels appear. In §1 (in the first stage) the description appears in the context that the beings will have faith in the Three Jewels and will be devoted to offering, since they have become blessed and had great wealth and enjoyment through the power of the earth- goddess Drdha who was encouraged by one of the Buddhist sutras named Suv.9) And in §4 (in the second stage) the description appears in the context that those beings who employ the several spells taught by the earth-goddess Drdha will be blessed and protected since she is always watched over by the Three Jewels so that she can grant the beings blessing and protection.10) It must be also noted that in these contexts Chapter 18 refers to the Three Jewels, that is, Buddhist monks and nuns as well as the Buddha and the Law.
From these descriptions in the particular contexts, we can comprehend the inten- tion of the compilers of the Suv as follows: "Since the beings will be blessed, will
1097
(69)
 An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarna rabhasa (70) Expressed and Intimated in the Drdha-parivarta (T. SUZUKI)
havegreatwealthandenjoyment,andwillbeprotectedbythepoweroftheearth-
goddess Drdha who is encouraged by one of the Buddhist scripturesnamed Suv, andisalwayswatchedoverbytheThreeJewelsofBuddhism,itishighlyexpected
thattheywillbewillingtomake alotofofferingstotheBuddha11)orBuddhist monasteries,nottotheHindu gods orbrahmins."
As has been pointed out in Suzuki [2006],Buddhist monks and nuns who have transmittedtheLaw oftheBuddha andpracticedforthesupremeenlightenment, cannotaccomplishtheirdutywithoutany assistancee,speciallyfinancialassistance oflaypeople.Thus thehypothesisproposedbythepresentauthorappearsquite reasonable,thatoneoftheintentionsofthecompilersoftheSuvliesintheirattempt to survive in the religiousworld of India by emphasizing the value and the usefulnessof[Mahayana]Buddhism totheproponents,byconsistentlycollecting many doctrinesandritesallthroughthestageoftheformation.
4.A TentativeConclusion
Itistentativelcyoncludedhere,fromwhat hasbeen saidabove,thatwiththe
compilationof Chapter 18 referringto thosereligiousmeritswhich aremundane andpopularinIndia,thecompilersoftheSuvmusthaveattemptedtoemphasize thevalueandtheusefulnessoftheSuv totheproponents,especiallytothose farmersinIndiawho mighthavenotbeenBuddhistsatthattime,andalsoattempted to attainfinancialaid from the proponents for the sake of accomplishing their transmittioonftheLaw andreligiouspracticeforthesupremeenlightenment.
We can thereforesay thatthe validityof the hypothesishas been strengthened throughtheexaminationinthispaper.Hoveever,itsverificatiosntillneedstobe studiedinfurtheresearch.
1) Suzuki, T. [1996]The Mahameghasutra as an Origin of an Interpolated Part of the Present Suvarnaprabhasa, Journal of Indian and BuddhistStudies 89 (45-1),Tokyo,pp. 28-30; Suzuki, T. [2003] Stupa Worship and Dharma Evaluation in the Suvarnapra- bhasa, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 102 (51-2), Tokyo, pp. 32-36; Suzuki, T. [2004] Rites and Buddhism: A Perspective from the Sarasvati-parivarta in the Suvarnaprabhasa, Journal of Indian and BuddhistStudies 104 (52-2),Tokyo, pp. 12-17; Suzuki, T. [2005] The Unchanged Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarnaprabhasa:
1098
 An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarnaprabhasa Expressed and Intimated in the Drdha parivarta (T. SUZUKI)
(71)
An Examination through the Verification of the Hypothesis on "the Independence of
[Mahayana]Buddhism," Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 106 (53-2), Tokyo,pp. 20-26; Suzuki, T. [2006] The Primary Introduction of the Rites for Good Fortune into
the Suvarnaprabasa Described in the Sri-parivarta, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 109 (54-3), Tokyo, 2006, pp. 42-50; and Suzuki [1998a, 1998c, 1999, 2005a and
2005b] in Japanese.
2) 〈Texts and Abbreviations〉
Suv Suvarnaprabhasa or Suvarna [-pra-]bhasottamasutrendraraja.
SuvC1『 金 光明經 』四巻,曇 無讖 譯.T. No. 663.
SuvS Suvarnabhasottamasutra, ed. J. Nobel, Leipzig, 1937.
SuvT1 'phags pa gSer 'od dam pa mdo sde'i dbah po'i rgyal po zes bya ba theg pa chen
po'i mdo, arya-Suvarnaprabhasottamsautrendraraja-nama-makayana-sutra, known. P No. 176.
SuvC2『 合 部金 光明 經』八 巻,寳 貴合 糅.T. No. 664. 3uvT2 'pkags pa g8er 'od dam pa mdo sde'i dbah po'i
po'i mdo, arya-SuvarUaprabha-sottamastitrendraraja-nama-makayana-sutra, mitra, Silendrabodhi and Ye Ses sde. P No. 175.
SuvC3『 金光 明最勝 王經 』十巻,義 淨 譯. T. No. 665. SuvT Suvarnaprabhasottamasijtra, ed. J. Nobel, Leiden, (T. Taisho Tripitaka; P Peking Kanjur)
rgyal po zes
1944.
bya ba theg
tr. un-
pa chen tr. Jina-
3) "Whatever mundane and supermundane (laukikalokottara) treatiscs have gone forth in the whole of Jambudvipa, by which these beings will be blessed, all those have been revealed, expounded, and set fbrth here in the excellent Suv, king of sUtras, which is superior and more outstanding, by the Lord, the Tathagata, the Arhat, the fully enlight- ened one." (Su vs 97.10-98.1) See Suzuki [2005 and 2006].
4) The report that the first inscription supPosed to belong to Mahayana can date back to no earlier than the 5-6th century C.E. might suggest that Mahayana Buddhism had became popular or known after that period. See Suzuki [2004].
5) 堅 牢 地 神 品 第 十 八.The way of numbering the chapters in this paper follows the way in the SuvC3.
6) The present author calls the five successive chapters consisting of the Caturmaha- raja-parivarta (see Suzuki [2005]), the Sarasvati-parivarta (see Suzuki [2004]), the
Sri-parivarta (see Suzuki [2006]), the Drdha-parivarta, and the Samjnaya-parivarta,
"the Five Chapters on the Various Gods and Goddesses
," which tell the various merits
granted to the proponents of the Suv by the various gods and goddesses.
7) 制 底(SuvC3 440c28). This, however, does not follow that the original Sanskrit word
for mchod rten here is caitya since there are several cases where "制 底" in the SuvC3 corresponds to stupa in the SuvS (SuvC3 445a19 and SuvS 156.6; SuvC3 445c9 and SuvS
159.8; SuvC3 451a10 and SuvS 204.5, and so on). 1099
 An Intention of the Compilers of the Suvarnaprabhasa
(72) ExpresasendIntimatientdheDrdha-pariv(TarS.tUaZUKI)
8)
skyes pa'am bud med dam 'khor bzi po gan la la zig gis ... gzuns snags 'di bzlas pas spyan dran bar 'gyur to (SUVT304.4-15).
若 有男子女人及 諸 四衆,(中 略)即 可誦 此請召 之呪.(SuvC3 440c22-441a1).
Since all the Buddhists can be represented by "Buddhist monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen ('khor bzi po,四 衆)," it may follow that "men (skyes pa,男 子)" and "women (bud med
,女 人)" here refer to non-Buddhists.
9) yatrayatrabhadantabhagavamstaninanavidhanisattvaninanavidhesuprthivipradesesu imany evamrupani nanavidhani sutrantahetuni parasparenarocayeransamsravayeranva kathasambandhamvakurviran/sarve tobhadantabhagavanprthivipradesaojasvitarasca bhavisyanti snigdhataras ca bhavisyanti/sarvesam sattvanam tesu tesu prthivipradesesu nanavidhaniprthivirasani sarvopakarananibhuyisthataramutpatsyante vivardhayisyante vaipulyatam gamisyanti/sarvani tani sattvani sukhitani bhavisyanti/mahadhanani mahabhoganicadanadhimuktanicabhavisyanti/trisu ratnesvabhiprasannanibhavisy- anti//(SuvS 126.2-11)
10) sems mi g-yen bar snags 'di bzlas na/bsam pa thams cad 'grub par 'gyur te/bdag gi tshig 'di mi slu bar ni sans rgyas dkon mchog darn/chos dkon mchog darn/dge 'dun dkon mchog rnams bdag la mnon du gzigs sin dgons par gsol//(SuvT305.4-8)
若有至心誦此呪者,所 求必遂.我 不妄語.我 以仏法僧宝,而 為 要契,証 知是実.
(SuvC3441a19-21)
11) Since the Buddha Sakyamuni has already entered into his perfect peacefulness
(parinirvrta), these offerings are to be made to those stupas or images of the Buddha that represent the Buddha and are recognized as none other than the Buddha himself.
〈Key words〉 金光明経堅牢地神品,金 光明経の編 纂意図,〔 大乗〕仏教の生き残り策とし ての金光明経,イ ンド〔大乗〕仏教の実像理解
(Professor, Yamaguchi Prefectural University, D.Litt.)
1100
