 (116) Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007
A Study of Tantric Rituals in Nepalese Buddhism Samadhi of Tara in Saptavidhanuttarapuja
BAJRACHARYA Manik
1. Introduction
Most of the major rituals in Newar Buddhism consist of a stage where a Vajracarya priest contemplates the nature of a certain deity as a, part of the main rites. The rite is called 'samadhi danegu' and it consists mainly of contemplatinghis own tutelary deity, which in most cases is the Samvara.The samadhi of Samvara, called tri-samddhi, is so common among Newar Buddhists today that it is wor- shipped in most of the rituals performed by Vajracaryas, regardless of the deity in question. This is true also in the case of Saptavidhanuttarapuja (hereafterSP),which is one of the most popular and fully developed exotericNewar Buddhist rituals. The ritual of SP employs the Sevenfold Supreme Worship') and the deity to be wor- shipped in it are in most cases Tara, Lokesvara, or Sakyamuni Buddha. Exceptionally,in the SP that I observed on August 28, 2004 in a private house at Lalitpur city, a samadhi of Tara was performed instead. Depending on the ritual performed and the manuscript of the ritual manual used on that day, I will describe the samadhi below. The manuscript, which is a private collection of Dharmaraja Vajracarya,has 43 folioswith 14lines per folio.It is dated as Nepal Era 1061(1941 AD) and compiled by Siddhiraja Gubhaju of Bubaha, Patan.
2. The samadhi of Tara
The samadhi rite is the beginning of the main rites. It is performed after the pre- liminary rites like suryargha (receptionof the Sun),gurupddargha (receptionof the Vajrasattvandthe priest),the purification, and the gurumandala. The Tarasamadhi of SP can be described in the followingstages:
[I]SalutationsI:n thebeginning,salutationsare madeto the triplegems.Thenthe Bud- 1144
 A Study of Tantric Rituals in Nepalese Buddhism (M. BAJRACHARYA) (117)
dhas and Bodhisattvas are requested to be present in every direction.
[II] Contemplation of Mahattaritara: A syllable Tam is visualized at the middle of a moon- diskin one'sown heart. Buddha and Bodhisattvasare arisen from the ray of light streamed from the syllable. Then the text describes that one should first perform exterior and inte- rior worships (bahyadhyatmyapuja)and then the sevenfold supreme worships. Then sun-
yata is conceived followed by the pronunciations that all the phenomena and the self are
pure in nature. Then from the Tam syllable, a white utpala flower is generated in which another syllable Tam is present. From that syllable, Mahattaritara is generated who is fully
ornamented and seated cross-legged(paryanka) over a great-moon-disk(mahacandrasana) on a lotus. She is green in color and has no companions. She is granting boon (varada) with her right hand and holdinga stalk of blue lotus (indivara)in the left. Then conceiving the posture of samayamudra, one visualizes oneself as Mahattaritara. Pushpendra Kumar discusses, by referring to several labelled images, that Mahattaritara was also known as Mahattarayi, and Mahat-tara.2)He also gives iconographic variations of this form of Tara as being flanked by two female companionsand other one as being seated in lalitasana. [III] Contemplationof Varadatara: The secondsamadhi is that of Varadatara.After con- templating sunyata as in the former samadhi, one visualizes in oneself a all-sided lotus (visvakamala)born from the syllable Pam. A green colored syllable Tamis then visualized on a moon-disk which is born from the syllable A in the middle of the lotus. Then from the syllable Tam, the green colored Varadatara is generated.
She is distinguishable by her four female companions. She is holding a water-lily (nilot-
pala) in the left hand, granting wishes (varada) in the right and seated in the ardhapary- anka posture. She is flanked by Asokakanta and Mahamayuri in the right side and by
Ekajata and Aryajamguli in the left side. Asokakanta is yellow in color, and holding a branch of Asoka tree and a Vajra with her left and right hands. Mahamayuri, yellowishin color, holds a peacock-tail-feather(mayurapicchika) and a yaktail-fan (camara) in her left and right hands. Ekajata is dwarfish, dark colored, and holding a tiger skin (vyaghrajina). She has three eyes and terrible tusks. She has. blazing hair and is also holding a chopper (kartr) and a skull-cup (kapala). Similarly,Aryajamguli, green in color, is holding a black snake (krsnoraga) and a fan (camara) with her left and right hands. Then one visualizes these deities as oneself.
[IV]Adhisthana: After that, one performs the empowering(adhisthana) of the moon, the sun, one's hands, conch-shell, flowers, the bali, the ritual ground, and one's body, speech and mind, etc.
1145
 (118) A Study of Tantric Rituals in Nepalese Buddhism (M. BAJRACHARYA)
[VINyasa:This is followedby nyasa,a processwheremantrasof variousdeitiesare im-
plementedintodifferentpartsoftheworshipper'bsody.Atotalof26mantrasareimple- mentedusingbothrightandlefthands.
[VI]Akarsana:Atthispoint,onemeditatesthatAryatarawhoisintheAkanisthaheaven isinvokedintothemandala.ThemantraOmTareTuttareTureSvahaismuttered108 timesto her.
[VII]WorshippingI:n the nextstage,Aryatarais worshippedwithfive transcendental Buddhas.It is followedby the worshippingof 40 Taras.
[VIII]Concludingrite: At theconclusionof thesamadhi,one recitespraisesto the tran- scendentalBuddhas,Aryatara,Mahattaritaraa,nd Prasannatarafollowedby the worship-
pingof the crown(makuta). 3. Conclusion
-The samadhi of Mahattaritara described in the text is almost similar to the sadha-
na no. 90 of the Sadhanamala.3)The text misses the parts where vikacotpalamudra is performed and the mantra Om Tare Tuttare TureSvaha is muttered. On the other hand, in Sadhanamala, we do not find the line where Mahattaritara is identified withthe self.
-In the second samadhi, the text does not mention the name of the central deity. But the sadhana no. 91 of Sadhanamala4)is identical to the samadhi. As in the for- mer samadhi, the text misses the mantra Om Tare Tuttare Ture Svaha. Considering the similarity, we may assume that the samadhis of both the Taras were extracted to this SP text from the Sadhanamala.
-The process of nyasa in this samadhi is different than that of the trisamadhi. In
the trisamadhi5),24 seed syllablesare implementedin 24 parts of the body (catur- vimsaty-anga-nyasa)using the middle finger of the right hand. In the case of pres- ent samadhi, 26 mantras are implemented using both right and left hands.
The Text
1 taraya samadhi dane. jaki svam svapotane.
om namah sritriratnabuddhaya. samanvaharantumam buddhah asesadiksu sams- thitah. 3.
1146
 A Study of Tantric Rituals in Nepalese Buddhism (M. BAJRACHARYA) (119)
2 hanamjaki jvane. om namah sriaryatarayai.
prathamam svahrdaye indumadhyasthatambijavinirgatarasmibhirnispannangu- rubuddhabodhisattvandhyayat.tamsca bahyadhyatmyapujabhihsampujyatadag-
re saptavidhanuttarapujamkuryyat. om sunyatam vibhavya om svabhavasuddhah sarvadharmah svabhavasuddho'hamiti uccarayet.tat candre tamsambhuta-sitotpal asthatamkarodbhutamtaram syamam dvibhujam ekamukham daksine varadam vame sanala[in]divan sarvabharanabhusitam mahacandrasane paryyankanisan- nam cintayet. [samaya]mudrambandhayet.mahattaritaratmanambhavayet.
3 ompurvavatsunyataparyantamvibhavyapamkarajavisvabjadalamadhyeakarena-
candre syamatamkarajamtaram syamavarnam sarvalamkaradharam.vame nilot-
palavatimdaksinevaradamardhaparyarnkanisaanmd.aksinaparsveasokakantam nanaratnamakutamvamadaksinahastayorasokapallavakulisadharamt.atha maha-
mayurim vametarakarayohmayurapicchikacamaradharinim.vamaparsveekajatam kharvam krsnam vyaghrajinadharamtrinetram damstrakaralavadanamjvalatpin-
galordhvakesamkartrkapaladharinim.tatha aryajamgulim syamam vamadaksina- hastayohkrsnoragacamaradharinimsvabhavayet.
4 mandale tane. thana bhavana yaye. om akarena candramandalam.javam. om akarena suryamandalam.khavam. om vajrapadmahastau hum. sahkha thiye. om sarnkhadhisthanahum. pujabhah thiye. om puspadhisthana hum. bali. om tist- havajrehum. mandale. om vajrabhumehum. sire thiye.om ah hum.
5 thana nyasayaye. lahajvalapa. om ah humaryatarayaihum.javagu laha puyeke. om akarena candramandalam.khavagu puyeke. om akarena suryamandalam.ja- vagu ahgu raniya. om krum am jim kham hum. khavagu raniya. om lam mam
pam tam krum. javagu laha- cakamka kyane. om ah hum svasvaha. khavagu cakamka kyane. om vajrayaksahum. sire thiye. om aryatara hrim. kathusa thiye. om jayayai hum. nugalay thiye. om vijayayaihum. tyapusa thiye. om jayavijayai hum.pall thiye.om humsvavaladayaihum.pamcarigalaha nipamcakamke.om hum ha abhayapradayaihum.
khavamyayegu. sire thiye.om maitrye hum. kapale. om ksitigarbhehum. mhutu- sa. om tare hum. nugale. om manjughose hum. tyapusa. om sarvanivarnavis- kambhi hum.
javagubaha thiye.om ajitayahum. khavagubaha thiye.om aparajitayahum. 1147
 (120) A Study of Tantric Rituals in Nepalese Buddhism (M. BAJRACHARYA)
khvale thiye.om marasainyapramardanayahum. nugale thiye. om hum kalamrtyu-
prasamanayahum.javagu pull thiye.om humdhanadayaihum.khavagupuli thi-
ye. om vasudharayaihum. jadhu thiye. om amitabhaya hum svaha. laha nipam kyane.om aryatarankusajah hum vam hoh svaha.
6 thana jaki jvana lahajvalape. om hrdisthitapamkarajarasmimmudraya samharya akanisthabhuvanasthittmsriaryatarammandale akarsanenabhavayet.
japayaye. dhah 108.om tare tuttare ture svaha.
7 svabhavasuddha padyadi taye. srimatsrisriaryataramandalepadyacamanargham
praticcha svaha. om aryatarayai vajradhatumandale svaha. om dharmadhatave namah svaha. aryavairocanayasvaha. om aksobhyayasvaha. om ratnasambhavaya
svaha.
om amitabhayasvaha.om amoghasiddhayesvaha.aryatarayaisvaha. puspatarayai svaha. dhupatarayai svaha. dipatarayai svaha. gandhatarayai svaha. rasatarayai svaha.
prasannatarayai svaha. suklatarayai svaha. dhanadatarayai svaha. locanatarayai svaha. mamakitarayaisvaha. pandaratarayai svaha. tarayai svaha. bhrkutitarayai svaha. saptalocanitarayaisvaha. svetatarayai svaha. nilatarayai svaha. pitatarayai svaha. raktatarayai svaha. syamatarayaisvaha. siddhilocanitarayaisvaha. vajrata- rayai svaha. ekajatitarayai svaha. yogatarayai svaha. bhuvanatarayai svaha. can- dratarayai svaha. suryatarayai svaha. mangalatarayai svaha. hasyatarayai svaha. lasyatarayaisvaha. rasarangatarayaisvaha. mahamangalatarayaisvaha. suman- galatarayaisvaha. sampurnaghatatarayaisvaha. dviparajatarayaisvaha. basantata- rayai svaha.
dharmatarayaisvaha.punyatarayaisvaha. sriaryatarayaisvaha. vajratarayaisvaha. om vajrapuspampraticcha svaha.
8 puja. lasya. stuti. om namo sriaryatarayainamah.
om aksobhyamca mahabodhimsriratnasambhavayanamo namah/ amitabhamca maharagam amoghasiddhayenamamyaham// aryataramahadevimahattaritarayaniamonamah/ prasannataradevimSrito to tare namastu to//
om namaste taradevinam tare ture vire tuttare bhayanasanam/ ture sarvakaramsvahakaramnamamyaham//
1148
 2) 3) 4) 5)
(i) vandana, (ii) pujana, (iii) desana (iv) modana, (v) adhyesana, (vi) yacana, and (vii) namana.
Prof. PushpendraKumar (1992):p. 58 Benoytosh Bhattacharya(1968):pp. 176-177 Ibid., p. 177
See Herakaji (1995):pp. 20-21
A Study of Tantric Rituals in Nepalese Buddhism (M. BAJRACHARYA)
(121)
om sarvavyapibhavagryagryam sugatadhipatijinam/ traidhatukam namaskaromi sarvabhayanasanam//
naivedya. mata. yedharma.
thana makutapuja yaye. iti sriaryatara samadhi samaptam.
Bibliography
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh(Ed.). Sadhanamala Vol.1. Baroda: Oriental Institute. 1968. Kumar, Prof. Pushpendra. Tara: TheSupreme Goddess. India: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan.
1992.
Vajracarya,Badriratna. Aryyatara Pujavidhi. Kathmandu: Hira Ratna Vajracarya.1996. Vajracarya,Herakaji. TrisamadhividhiPustakam. Lalitpur: ManadeviVajracarya. 1995. Vajracarya, Pandita Asakaji, Harsaratna Dhakhva and Santaharsa Vajracarya. 'Saptavid-
hanapuja'. In Palesvam vol. 2. Lalitpur: Lotus Research Centre. pp. 1-9. 1990. Vajracarya, Sarvajnaratna. Saptavidhanuttara Pujavidhi. Kathmandu: Nepala Bauddha
Samskrti SamraksanaKendra. 2003.
Manuscript:
Om Taradharmaya Saphu Thva, in the private collection of Dharmaraja Vajracharya, Pa-
tan, Number of folios: 43, NS 1061.
Notes:
1) ThesevenfoldsupremeworshipintheBhadracaryapranidhanahasbeendescribedas:
〈Key Words〉 tara, samadhi, saptavidhanuttarapuja, Newar Buddhist Ritual (GraduateStudentA,ichiGakuin University)
1149
