 Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007 (45)
Characteristics of the Studies of Tamil Saiva Siddhanta
TAMURA Koya
1 Introduction The study of Saiva Siddhantahas traditionallytaken two routes. The first is that of the Sanskrit Saiva Siddhanta, which developed in Sanskrit texts written by the Saiva theorists such as Sadyojyotis,Ramakantha and Aghorasiva. The second is that of the Tamil Saiva Siddhanta (abbreviatedas TS hereafter),which developed in Tamil texts as represented by Cittanta Cattiram, a series of texts dat- ing from the 12th to 14th centuries.1)The latter also includes the studies of Tirumurai, which date from the 7th to 12thcenturies.2)
As the two routes have different historical backgrounds, scholars have tended to
consider Sanskrit Saiva Siddhanta and TS to be separate schools of thought.3) Tokunaga,however,observed that "becauseTamil Saiva Siddhantahas a theory of
divine grace that supplementsthe religious rites, it is probablethat these two schools
of Saiva Siddhanta have a mutually supporting relationship."4)Therefore, one of the
goals of recent studies of Saiva Siddhanta is to elucidate the relationship between Sanskrit Saiva Siddhantaand Ts.5)
2 A Problematic Assumption in the Studies of TS Although a number of stud- ies of TS have been undertaken since the 19th century, they are not particularly helpful for the comparative study because they tend to regard TS as a single fixed system. This assumption that the texts of TS form a single fixed system is not ex- pressly stated, but it is observed by the fact that the studies are all synthetic and quite hesitant to compare various different theories in the developmentof the sys- tem of TS. The words of Piet strongly imply its existence: "Meykanta-deva, the author of the Sivajnana-bodha, summarizes the entire philosophy within the compass of forty lines of Tamil poetry. He wants to show that, logically, the
Siddhanta is all of one piece, woven from the finest fabric of the human mind."6) 1073
 (46) Characteristics of the Studies of Tamil Saiva Siddhanta (K. TAMURA)
Early TS, represented by Cittanta Cattiram, spans 100 years, and we cannot deny its theoretical developments.The understanding on "the letter om" is a good exam-
ple. The Tiruvarutpayan written by Umapati7),whom the present author is now studying,contains a chapteron "five letters".The followingtwo stanzas are the be-
ginning of this chapter:
Thebookswhichhave[Siva's]grace,theAranyaka8a)nd other[texts]areall concerning
thenatureofthefivethings9)i,foneunderstandsandgoesintothem.
God,sakti,pasa, strongmayaandlife(atman)
existin "the letter pm". (Tiruvarutpayan81,8210)) "The letter om" (onkaram)is typically analysed as comprising five elements, namely
"a", "u", "ma", "vintu (Skt.bindu)" and "natam (Skt. nada)". It can therefore be said that the five things beginning with God correspond to these five elements. In TS
theory, however,the five things correspond to "five letters" consisting of "ci", "va", "y a", "na" and "ma". The stanzas quoted above are in fact followedby detailed ex-
planations of the "five letters", and "the letter om" is not referred to again in Tiruvarutpayan. We can therefore conclude that "the letter om" and the "five let-
ters" became unified in Tiruvarutpayan.
This unification is not found, however,in the texts of Meykantarand his disciple
Arunanti.11T)hefiveelementsof"theletterom"areassignedtoakankaram(Skt. ahamkara),putti (Skt.buddhi),manam (Skt.manas),cittam (Skt.citta)and ullam, and to five atiteyvam (Skt.adhideva),respectively.This explanationof "the letter om" takes a position distinct from that of the "five letters".
Conversely,Manavacakankatantar, another disciple of Meykantar, mentions only thenameof "theletterom"withoutreferenceto itsfiveelementsandatiteyvam.12) Approximately50 years later, Umapatiwrote Civappirakacam,which does not men- tion "the letter om" at all.
It is probable that the concept of "the letter om" underwent changes early in the history of TS. The assumption held by the scholars, however,preventedthem from
paying attention to such theoretical developments of TS. When we read the texts more carefully, they in fact set forth a number of different theories, and the theorists
sometimeseven disputewith eachother. Wecan thereforeconcludethat the assump- tion is incorrect.
1074
 Characteristics of the Studies of Tamil Saiva Siddhanta (K. TAMURA) (47)
3 Characteristics of the Studies of TS A review of the history of the study of TS clarifieshow this assumptionhas been formed. There are three types in the aims of studies of TS, and the studies can be classified accordingly.Although the types were quite different from each other, all of them resulted in the same assumption. 3.1 Studies Comparing TS with Christianity The study of TS began with the need for Christian missionaries to understand the religion and philosophy of South India for the sake of their mission. As a result, understanding the outline of TS as a theoretical system was more important than elucidating the history of its develop- ment and examining the different perspectives of the theorists. Therefore, early studies of TS tended to synthesise various theories. The studies of Hoisington,Pope and Schomerus are considered to be this type.13)Schomerus' studies, which are based on his vast philological reading, completed the first and most elaborate de- scription of the whole system of TS theories, and became the most important source of information for the later studies.
3.2 Studies under the Influence of the Tamil Renaissance The first Indian scholartostudyTSinmodernwaywasNallaswamiPillai.14H)eaimedtodevelop an academic standard by which Tamil teachers themselves, rather than Europeans, could teach Tamil and Indian subjects15a)nd regain their just pride by removing the stereotype of "the noble Aryans" against the "savage Tamilians".16)
Nallaswami Pillai began publishing a journal, Siddhanta Deepika,17i)n English and Tamil, and encouraged Tamil scholars to study Tamil and Indian subjects.18) These studies, undertaken by Tamilian scholars who sympathized with his views, were mainly engaged in comparing TS with western thoughts or applying TS to the contemporary society.19F)or the basis of their studies and as a symbol of their pride, the scholars needed the fixed system of TS and paid no attention to its develop- ment.20)
3.3 Philological Studies Philologicalstudiesbegantobeundertakeninthemid- 20th century. The studies of Paranjoti, Matthews, Piet, Devasenapathi and Dhavamonybelongto thistype.21)
This type of study cannot be satisfactorily defined as philological, however,be- cause these scholars were very eager to deeply expoundone text or one concept,but
quitereluctanttoelucidatethedifferencesamongthetexts.22A)saresult,theyper- 1075
 (48) Characteristics of the Studies of Tamil Saiva Siddhanta (K. TAMURA) petuated the view of TS as a fixed system.
4 Issues in the Study of TS and Conclusion The above analysesof the history of the study of TS show that the studies have tended to regard TS as a single fixed system. In other words, the scholars always focused their interest on the static as- pect of TS and have been quite hesitant to consider the dynamics of theoretical de- velopment of TS in the texts. It is therefore necessary to re-examine the texts of TS for more exact understanding, compare them with each other and reveal their roles in the developmentof TS. Only after this re-consideration of TS will the compara-
tive study of Sanskrit Saiva Sidddntaand TS be possibleand meaningful.
1) Cittanta Cattiram consists of the following 14 texts which date from the 12th to 14th centuries: Tiruvuntiyar,Tirukkalirruppatiyar,Civananapotam,Civananacittiyar,Irupa- virupatu, Unmaivilakkam,Civappirakacam,Tiruvarutpayan,Vinavenpa,Porrippakrotai, Kotikkavi,Nencuvitututu, Unmainerivilakkam,Cankarpanirakaranam.
2) ForoutlinesofthehistoryofTSinJapanese,seeMuneoTokunaga,"Minami-indono Shukyo Shiso", in Iwanami Koza Toyo Shiso, Vol.6 (Indo Shiso 2), Iwanami Shoten, 1988, pp. 163-191;Jun Takashima, "Early History of Saiva Mathas-8th-13th Centu- ries", in Journal of the Japanese Associationfor South Asian Studies, No. 1, The Japa- nese Association for South Asian Studies, Tokyo, 1989, pp. 41-59; do., "Siva Shinko
no Kakuritsu - Saiva Siddhanta to Minami Indo", in Dravida no Sekai-Indo Nyumon II, Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai, Tokyo, 1994, pp. 41-53; Sengaku Mayeda, "Siva-kyo Shoha no Seiritsu to Tenkai-Saiva Siddhanta wo Chushin ni shite", in Indo Chu- sei Shiso Kenkyu, Shunjusha, Tokyo, 1991,pp. 265-287. See also Muneo Tokunaga, "Civananacittiya,r Parapakkam 264-301", in Indological Review(Indogakuho),No. 3, Indogakuho-sha, Kyoto, 1981,pp. 1-18 (in English); do., "Saiva Siddhanta Ha no Sakti
Shiso", in Journal of Indian and BuddhistStudies (IndogakuBukkyogakuKenkyu), Vol.
XXXVII,No. 2, Japanese Association of Indian and Buddhist Studies, Tokyo, 1989.
3) For example, in Japan, the following statements were made: "Sanskrit Saiva Siddhanta is distinguished from Tamil Saiva Siddhanta of advaita theory, by using only Sanskrit and its visistadvaita theory" (Tetsuzan Ihara, Indo-kyo, 3rd edition, Daito Shuppansha, 1981,p. 259; first publishedin 1943);"Southern Saivism tends to be treated as a single school of Saiva Siddhanta, but it seems to be right to think that this Saiva Siddhanta is divided into Tamil Saiva Siddhanta discussed in this article and Sanskrit Saiva Sid- dhanta represented by Aghorasiva."(MuneoTokunaga, "Minami-indo no Shukyo Shiso",
footnote8, p. 190).
1076
 4) 5)
6) 7)
MuneoTokunaga,op.cit.,pp.190-191.
ThisarticledoesnotcommentonSanskritSaivaSiddhanta.ThelateststudiesofSan- skrit Saiva Siddhanta are: Dominic Goodall ed. and tr., Bhatta Ramakantha's Commen- tary on the Kiranatantra, volume I, Institut Francais de Pondichery, Pondichery, 1998; do., The Parakhyatantra-A Scripture of the Saiva Siddhanta, Institut Francais de Pon- dichery & Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient, Pondichery, 2004.
JohnH.Piet,ALogicalPresentationoftheSaivaSiddhanataPhilosophy,TheChris- tian Literature Society for India, Madras, 1952,p. 6.
When comparing TS with Sanskrit Saiva Siddhanta, the most notable theorist of TS is Umapati, who lived in the 13th and 14th centuries. He is said to be the au- thor of Civappirakacam, Tiruvarutpayan, Vinavenpa, Porrippakrotai, Kotikkavi, Nencuvitututu, Unmainerivilakkam, Cankarpanirakaranam, Tiruttontarpuranacaram, Cekkilarnayanarpuranam, Tirumuraikkantapuranam,Koyirpuranam,Arunmuraittirattu, Civattalacivanamacattinamakkalivenpa,Pauskarabhasya, Sataratnasangraha (the texts underlined are in Sanskrit, others in Tamil). Attributions to him of some of the texts above, such as Unmainerivilakkam,are doubted.
"The books which have Siva'sgrace" are the texts of Saivism, and "the Aranyaka" here means the four Veda.
8)
Characteristics of the Studies of Tamil Saiva Siddhanta (K. TAMURA) (49)
9)
10) arul nulum aranamum allatum aintin, porul nul teriyap pukin. (81)irai catti pacam elil
Theseareinthiscontextthefivethingsgiveninthenextverse.
mayai dvi, ura nirkum ornkarattuul. (82)
11) Meykantr, a theorist of the 13th century, is regarded as the first systematiser of TS
theories by his writing of Civananapotam. Arunanti wrote an elaborate commentary on
Civananapotam,Civananacittiyar,in the 13thcentury.
12) "The onkaram touches the good auspicious "va" and "ci", does not separate from
them and is the prevailing light."(Unmaivilakkam34)
13) H.R. Hoisington's translations of Civananapotam, Civappirakacam and Tattuvakat-
talaiinJournaloftheAmericanOrientalSociety,Vol.IV,1853;G.U. Pope,TheTiru- vacagam or 'Sacred Utterances' of the TamilPoet, Saint and Sage Manikka-Vacagar, Asian Educational Services,New Delhi, 1995(lst ed., Oxford, 1900);H.W. Schomerus, Der Caiva-Siddhanta: eine Mystik Indiens/nach den tamulischen Quellen bearbeitet unddargestellt,J.C. Hinrichs'scheBuchhandlung,Leipzig,1912.
14)J.M. NallaswamiPillaipublishedvariousstudies,suchasEnglishtranslations(Sivag- nana Botham of Meykanda Deva, 2nd ed., Dharmapuram, 1945;Siva-nana-siddhiar of Arunandi Sivacharya, Meykandan Press, Madras, 1913;Siva-nana-siddhiar Supakkam of Arulnandhi Sivam, Dharmapuram, 1948). His various studies were edited in Studies in Saiva Siddhanta, The South India Saiva Siddhanta Works Publishing Society, Ma- dras, 1984(lst ed., 1911).
15) See J.M. Nallaswami Pillai, "Our Aims", in Siddhanta Deepika, Vol. 1, No.1, 1897, 1077
 (50) Characteristics of the Studies of Tamil Saiva Siddhanta (K. TAMURA)
p. 14.
16) See do., "Ourselves",in Siddhanta Deepika, Vol. 7, No.1, 1907,p. 29.
17) TheLightof Truthor SiddhantaDeepika,a monthlyJournal devotedtoReligion,Phi- losophy,Literature and Science, Vols. 1-14, 1897-1914(reprinted by Asian Educational Services, Madras, 2001).
18) "Our Journal will devote itself to bring out translation of rare works in Sanscrit and Tamil, both literary and philosophical and religious, will devote its pages to a more critical and historical study of Indian Religious systems, to develop a taste for and to induce a proper and more appreciative cultivation of our Indian Classical and Vernacu- lar Languages and Literature, to bring into the Tamil all that is best and noblest in the literature and philosophy of the west, to supply to it its deficiency in the field of science and history, ancient and modern."(NallaswamiPillai, "Our Aims", pp. 14-15.)
19) Translations of the Tamil and Sanskrit texts into English are not a few, but they are, in the same way as explained in the next section, far from satisfactory.
20) NallaswamiPillai'smovementhascontinued,andmanyuniversitiesandinstitutions are engaged in the studies of TS. There are a number of studies in the journals such as SiddhantaDeepikaandSaivaSiddhanta,Journal devotedtotheExpositionofSiddhanta Philosophy,Religion,Literature and Comparative Understanding,Vols. 1-26, Saiva Sid- dhanta Maha Samajam, Madras, 1966-1993.
21) VioletParanjoti,SaivaSiddhanta,Secondand RevisedEdition,Luzac&Co.,London, 1954; Gordon Matthews, Siva-nana-bodham-A Manual of Saiva Religious Doctrine, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1948; John H. Piet, A Logical Presentation of the Sai- va Siddhanta Philosophy; V.A. Devasenapathi,Saiva Siddhanta-As Expounded in the Sivajnana-Siddhiyar and its Six Commentaries, University of Madras, Madras, 1960; M.Dhavamony,LoveofGod-According toSaivaSiddhanta,OxfordUniversityPress,
London, 1971.
22) TherearealsosomedifficultproblemsinTamiltextsasexplainedbyTakanobuTaka-
hashi in "Before Grammar: Issues on Reading Some Classical Tamil Texts", in Electric Journal of the Instituteof Indologyand TamilStudies, Vol.9 & 10, Universityof Co- logne, Koln, 2003 (http://www.fas.nus.edu.sg/journal/kolam/VOLUMES/kolam9&10/ takahashi.htm); do., "Bunpo Izen-Koten Text Kaishaku no Shomondai-", in Studies inIndian Philosophyand Buddhism,Vol.13, Departmentof Indian Philosophyand Bud- dhist Studies of the University of Tokyo,Tokyo, 2006.
〈 Key Words〉 Tamil,Saivism,SaivaSiddhantaU,mapati (GraduateStudent,UniversitoyfTokyo)
1078
