 (84) Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007
In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System
SAKUMA Hidenori
0. The differentiation of the innate capacities of sentient beings into five types, re- ferred to hereafter as the "five-gotra system" (wuxing gebie五 姓 各 別),is said to be a defining characteristic of the Chinese Consciousness-only(weishi唯識)school.
Some scholars would also seek to apply this five-gotra system to the Indian Yogacara school. But is it really valid to do so? In order to consider this question,
let us begin by examining in what form the idea of a five-gotra system existed in the thought of the Indian Yogacara school.
It is to be surmised that the controversy about the five-gotra system in China had its origins in the Yogacarabhumi(Yugie lun 瑜 伽 論)and Buddhabhumi-sastra (Fodijing lun佛 地 經 論),translated by Xuanzang玄奘in A.D. 648 and 649 respec- tively. Prior to Xuanzang's translations, Consciousness-onlythought had been ac- cepted in China and modified in a way suited to the Chinese on the basis of Tathagatagarbhathought, and it was considered to be an orthodox form of Buddhist thought. Having some misgivings about the content of this thought, Xuanzang en- deavoured to translate as faithfully as possible into Chinese the Yogacara thought that was actually being practised in India. It is to be surmised that for scholar- monks ingrainedwiththe ideathat "all sentientbeings possessBuddha-nature"even the notion of Three Vehicleswould have been difficult to accept.1)
1. The five-gotra system, with five separate categories of beings, is not systemati- cally expounded in the Yogacarabhumi,and each categoryis explained separatelyin different parts of the work. Here I shall cite as one examplea passage in the section on "maturation" (paripaka)in the Bodhisattvabhumi,of which the Sanskrit text has survived. In response to a question concerning "maturation," it is explained as fol- lows"fromtheperspectiveofthepersontobematurated"(BoBh,p.78,21ffT,.1579, 30:496c12ff):
1112
 In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
(85)
There are in brief four kinds of people to be maturated. Someone with the lineage of a Sri- vaka should be maturated in the Sravaka Vehicle, someone with the lineage of a pratyeka- buddha in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and someone with the lineage of a Buddha in the Buddha Vehicle. Even he who dwells in no lineage should be maturated by bodhisattvas and Buddhas, Blessed Ones, in order to go to a good destiny. These four kinds of people should be maturated in these four categories. Maturation should be known in this manner from the perspective of the person to be maturated.
What would a monk believing in the attainment of Buddhahood by all beings think on reading a passage such as this? It is here stated that there are people with no lineage (gotra) or predetermined nature, and though it may be possible for them to be reborn in a good destiny, they will stay within the cycle of transmigration and never attain Buddhahood.This would probablyhave.been felt to be unconscionable. Yet the idea that beings are reborn in a good destiny is also found, for example, in the Srimala-sutra.2)But just because they were deemed on account of a current of Indian thought underpinned by the notion of transmigration to be reborn in a good destiny rather than attaining Buddhahood, this would not necessarily have meant that they were ultimatelyabandonedby Buddhism.
2. The definitive passage for the five-gotra system is found in the Buddhabhumi- sdstratranslatedbyXuanzang(T.1530,26:298a12ff)T.hepassageinquestionde- scribes all five categories of beings, the first four of which all ultimately attain Buddhahoodthrough the power of the Buddha'scompassion.The important point about the Buddhabhumi-sdstra is that it adds a fifth category of beings who will never attain Buddhahood even with the help of the Buddha's compassion. Past re- search has shown that whereas Wonch'uk圓 測and others focused their attention on the question of how to enable those of indeterminate lineage to attain Buddhahood,
Kuiji窺 基stressed the fact that those of this fifth category were completely beyond salvation.3)
In which scriptures was this idea of a category of beings without any possibility of attaining Buddhahood actually propounded? Let us consider the case of the Prajnaparamita-sutra.4) What is worth noting here is the fact that it mentions only the first four categories, and it would appear, moreover, that those of indeterminate lineage, who have not yet entered the first stage of the bodhisattva, may engender
1113
 (86) In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
the aspiration for unsurpassed perfect awakening on hearing the teaching of prajna-
paramita and will eventually attain Buddhahood just like those destined for one of the three vehicles. To the best of my knowledge, the addition of a fifth category of beings devoid of any possibility of salvation does not appear in the lineage of the Three Vehicles, but appears in relation to aparinirvana-dharma, which belongs to a different current.
That being so, did the reference to beings without any defining lineage exist in the original text of the Buddhabhumi-sastra? Xuanzang's translation combines sev- eral commentarieson the Buddhabhumi-sutrawhich he attributed to Bandhuprabha and others. Amongthese commentaries,the only to have survived(inTibetantransla- tion)is the Buddhabhumi-vyakhyanaby Silabhadra,under whom Xuanzang studied at Nalanda. A careful comparison of Xuanzang's Chinese translation with the Tibetan translation of Silabhadra's commentary would suggest that he used Silabhadra's commentary as his main source when translating the Buddhabhumi- sastra. At the same time, Xuanzang's translation includes many additional passages not found in Salabhadra'sBuddhabhumi-vyakhyana,and some of these passages, moreover, contain ideas that were to characterize the doctrines of the Chinese Faxiang法 相school. Furthermore, the above section on the five-gotra system is completely missing in the Tibetan translation, and therefore the original Sanskrit, of Silabhadra's commentary. What does this signify?
3. According to an account given in the Yuqielun ji瑜 伽 論 記as restored through a comparison with Saicho's最 澄Hokke shtiku法 華 秀 句,5)Xuanzang made the fol- lowing observationsin this regard:
(1) The five categories of beings are expounded in the Lankavatara-sutra. The fifth of these (agotra)consists of two types of icchantika, namely, the icchantika who does not attain Buddhahood so as to save all sentient beings and the icchan- tika who, though he has cut off his roots of goodness, can still attain Buddhahood if he encounters a Buddha or bodhisattva, generates the aspiration for enlighten- ment, and practises towards this end. This is what was stated in the Sanskrit text seen by Xuanzang.
(2) According to scholars of the western regions (probablyNalanda),the fifth cate- goryofagotra (inthiscase,beingswithnopotentialwhatsoevefrorenlightenmenatnd
1114
 In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
(87)
therefore unable to attain Buddhahood even should they encounter a Buddha
va) was not expounded in the Larikavatara-sutra. Since bodhisattvas aspiring to non-abiding nirvana (apratisthita-nirvana) and icchantika who will ultimately at- tain Buddhahood, referred to in (1) above, are also mentioned in the Daji jing大
集 經and Da zhidu lun大 智 度 論,it was perhaps felt that there was no need to in- chide them as a fifth category.
(3) It is stated that the five categoriesof beings, includingthose with no possibili- ty of attaining Buddhahood,are not explicitlyexplained in the Lahkavatara-sutra, but are clearly explainedin the Mahayanasutralamkara.
(4) When Xuanzangwas about to return to China, severalscholarssuggestedthat it would be better to expunge the section on the teaching about beings without Buddha-nature since it would not be believed in China, but Xuanzang's teacher Silabhadrarebuked them for making such a suggestion.s)
Of course, since the above is not Xuanzang's own account but what had been transmitted in later times, it is quite likely to contain Chinese biases. But because it provides some important leads for exploring the origins of the five-gotra system, in the following I shall examine each of the above points.
Let us begin with Silabhadra's reproof of some other scholars' desire to delete the section on the five-gotra system. His reproof implied, at least in the view of later Chinese, that the notion of the five-gotra system was regarded as an important part of Yogacara thought by Silabhadra or by people at Nalanda. Were that so, it is then rather strange to find no reference whatsoever to this notion in the text of the Buddhabhumi-vyakhyana attributed to Silabhadra and preserved in Tibetan transla- tion. At the time when Xuanzang was residing at Nalanda Silabhadra was more than one hundred years old, and even assuming that he had written the Buddhabhumi- vyakhyana in his youth, it is hardly likely that he would have completed it in a short span of time never to subsequently revise it. Even in the case of basic Yogacara texts such as the Mahayanasutralamkara and Mahayanasamgraha it is possible to observe a process of historical development. In view of the fact that there is no men- tion of the five-gotra system in Silabhadra's Buddhabhumi-vyakhyana, it would seem more natural to suppose that even if ideas such as the five-gotra system were discussed among scholars at Nalanda, it was not regarded as an idea representative
1115
,or bodhisatt-
 (88) In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
of the Yogacaraschool.
4. As Indian sources for the five-gotra system, the Yugielunji cites the Lahkavatara- sutra and Mahayanasutralamkara. Owing to limitations of space, I shall here focus on the question of how agotra is treated in these two works.
4.1. Let us begin with the Lankavatara-sutra.
[Question:N]ext,Mahamatiw,hatarethefivelineageswithintuition(abhisamaya)? [Answer:T]heyarethelineagewiththeintuitionoftheSravakaVehiclet,helineagewith
theintuitionofthe PratyekabuddhVaehiclet,he lineagewiththe intuitionofthe Tathagata Vehiclet,he lineagenot determinedeitherway,and the fifth withouta lineage.(LAS,p. 63,2-5)
Of importance here is the addition of a "fifth" (pancamam)category "without a lineage"(agotram).7T)helineagesofthethreevehiclesandtheindeterminatelineage basicallybelong to Three Vehiclesthought, and the addition of a fifth "lineage-less" category results in what to all appearances looks like the five-gotra system.
The Sanskrit text of the Lahkavatara-sutra goes on to explain agotra (LAS,p. 65,17-67,1)a,nd its explanation coincides in content with point (1) made in the
Yuqielunji cited earlier. The first icchantika corresponds to the idea of non-abiding nirvana, while the second reflects the idea of universal Buddhahood going back to the Mahayana Nirvana-sutra, according to which even the icchantika can attain Buddhahood. In other words, there is no reference to the agotra with no potential whatsoever for attaining Buddhahood. The notion of the icchantika belongs in fact to a different current of thought from the agotra of the five-gotra system. If they merely happened to be mentioned in close proximity in the Larikavatara-sutra,8) there then is a possibility that the word "fifth," as in agotram ca pancamam, was not present in the original Sanskrit. Supposingthat the Lankavatara-sutra follows the four-gotra system of the Prajnaparamita-sutra, Srimala-sutra, and so on, and that it originally had only the lineages of the three vehicles and the indeterminate lineage, this would then mean that the earliest Chinese translator Gunabhadra added in A.D. 443 the number "five" to a passage that in the original had neither "four" nor "five." The fact that he translates the word abhisamaya in the extant Sanskrit text as wujian無 間and agotra as gebie zhongxing各 別 種 姓suggests that his Sanskrit text may have differed from the extant text. If the first sentence of the
1116
 In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
(89)
above passage quoted from the Lankavatara-sutra had read for instance "punar aparam Mahamate 'bhisamayagotrani katamani," without any reference to the num- ber "five," then it would agree with the assertion of scholars at Nalanda that there was no mention of agotra in the Lankavatara-sutra as reported in the Yuqielunji.9) This means, in other words, that the Lankavatara-sutra cannot serve as an authority for a five-gotra system that included the agotra with no potential for Buddhahood. 4.2. Does this mean, then, that a five-gotra system that included the agotra with no potential for Buddhahood was not propounded in India? In order to consider this point, let us next examine the Mahayanasutralamkara.
A verse on the distinction between the kinds [of lineages]:
The lineage may be determinate or indeterminate, shakeable or unshakeable
By conditions. This distinction between lineages is, in brief, fourfold.(v. 6)
In brief, lineages are fourfold. They are determinate and indeterminate, and these are
in [that]order unshakeableand shakeableby conditions. (MSA111.6[F: 21,14-18;L: 11520- 241)
As is evident from this passage, while the lineages are divided into four, there are in effect only two. Asvabhava and Sthiramati would subsequently equate these four lineages with the three vehicles and an indeterminate lineage, but no such interpre- tation can be found in the original. Assuming that the use of verse was necessary for the purposes of memorization and recollection in the practice of yoga, then the practitioner actually reciting this verse would have experienced in the course of his practice a sense of gradually progressing from a state of vacillation to one in which under the guidance of his teacher he was no longer vacillating in his resolve. This sixth verse is merely one of ten verses showing how one should bear in mind and put into practice the notion of "lineage," and the reason that there are four lineages is that in the first verse it is stated that for each of the eight aspects to be treated four kinds will be presented (MSA III.1[F: 20,2-3;L: 10,8-9])I.n my view, this had largelypractical connotations.
Asvabhava clearly defines "someone who possesses a determinate lineage" as "someonewho determinately abides in the lineage of the sravaka, pratyekabuddha
or Buddha," and Sthiramati too, following this line of thinking, expands on it in great detail. In both cases they have reinterpreted the "four kinds" as the lineages of
1117
 (90) In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
the three vehicles and a fourth indeterminate lineage, which is readily understand- able in theoretical terms. But an examination of other sections in the
Mahayanasutralamkara expounding One Vehicle thought (includingVasubandhu's commentary)shows that there were as yet no signs of this fourfold classification,10) and it does not seem likely to me that people had this in mind at the time.
Meanwhile,the agotra with no potential for Buddhahoodis taken up in verse 11 of the same chapter of the Mahayanasutralamkara, and rather than being linked to verse 6, agotra is posited in contrast to the gotra dealt with in the first ten verses. This makes it all the more difficult to suppose that there was any notion of a five-
gotra system that included a category without any potential for Buddhahood. Bearing this in mind, let us now consider the verse on agotra.
A verse on the distinction of him who dwells in no lineage:
One person is only intent on evil conduct, another has destroyed all good qualities; One person has no goodness conducive to liberation, [another] has little good, and another lacks the cause.
In this [verse]"he who does not have the quality for parinirvana" is meant by "he who dwells in no lineage." He is, in brief, of two kinds: he who does not have the quality for
parinirvana during that time and [he who does not have the quality for parinirvana] in
perpetuity.Thosewhodonothavethequalityforparinirvana duringthattimeareoffour kinds: he who is only intent on evil conduct, he who has severedthe roots of goodness, he
who does not have roots of goodness conduciveto liberation, and he who has only inferior roots of goodness and whose stock [of merit] is incomplete. On the other hand, he who does not have the quality for parinirvana in perpetuity is someone who lacks the cause, and for him the lineage for parinirvana is completely nonexistent.(MSA III.11[F: 22,21- 23,3; L: 12,19-13,2])
This passage describes two kinds of agotra, namely, those who do not attain Buddhahood for a certain period of time, but can do so after the end of this period, and those who will never attain Buddhahood. While it is conceivable that the expla- nation for the existence of those among the agotra with a possibility of attaining Buddhahood was omitted when explaining the various kinds of gotra, the omission
of any explanation of those with no possibility whatsoever of attaining Buddhahood,
not mentioned anywhere else in the Mahayanasutralamkara, invites the charge of a deficiency in its theories. The Mahayanasutralamkara included the agotra with no
1118
 In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
(91)
potential for Buddhahood so as to avoid any omissions in its explanationof gotra, and it did not activelypropound the notion of a gotra unableto attain Buddhahood.
There exist commentaries on the Mahayanasutralamkara by Asvabhava,thought to have flourished around A.D. 500, and by Sthiramati, thought to have lived circa A.D. 510-570. Sthiramati almost certainly wrote his commentary by expanding on that by Asvabhava.With regard to the above passage, Asvabhava merely gives an explanationbased on the usage of the negative prefix a-, while Sthiramati provides a more detailed exposition.
Whilethereisnoevidencefortheexistenceofa schemeconsistingofthelineag-
es of the three vehicles and the indeterminate lineage at the time when the verses
and Vasubandhu's commentary were composed, it had gradually evolved by the
time of Asvabhava.But even in the case of Asvabhava'scommentary it hardly seems
likely that he linked these to the agotra without any potential for Buddhahood so as
to create a single scheme. Whereas Asvabhava'scommentary begins by comment-
ingdirectlyonVasubandhu'scommentary(MSATP,.5530:59a8f),Sthiramatiadds: "Where it says `a verse on the distinction of the lineage-less,' having earlier ex-
plained the lineage of the sravaka, the lineage of the pratyekabuddha, the lineage of the bodhisattva, and the indeterminate lineage, it now explains the lineage-less"
(SAVbhP,.55315:2b3ff).WhereasAsvabhavaclearlyrefers to the lineagesofthe three vehicles and the indeterminate lineage in his commentary on verse 6, but does not link them directly to the verse on agotra, there is clear evidence in Sthiramati's commentary of an intent to create a scheme of five gotra. Here one can see the way in which the scheme of five gotra gradually evolved. It should of course be noted
that there is no evidenceof Sthiramati'shaving emphasizedand activelypropound- ed here or elsewherethe idea of a five-gotra system.
5. It is to be surmised that at the time when Xuanzang was studying under Silabhadraat Nalanda,a five-gotra system that includedthe agotra with no poten- tial for Buddhahoodwas not attracting very much attention.There is, however,a
possibilitythat aroundthe sametime or a littleearlier Sthiramatiwas formulatinga scheme of five gotra at Valabhi. Xuanzang probably did not meet Sthiramati when
he visited Valabhi, but according to a later account he studied under one of Sthiramati's disciples." When one takes these circumstances into account, it is pos-
1119
 (92) In Search of the Origins of the Five-Gotra System (H. SAKUMA)
sible that the idea of a five-gotra system introduced by Xuanzang to China derived from a current of thought associated with Valabhi. It is at any rate certain that the idea of a five-gotra system as found in China did not exist in the Indian Yogacara school, or at least, even if a scheme along these lines can be found in Sthiramati's commentary, it had not developed into a theory that was attracting much interest.
References
Kitsukawa Tomoaki橘 川 智 昭.1999."Enjiki ni yoru gosho kakubetsu no kotei ni tsuite -Enjiki shiso ni taisuru kaijoteki kaishaku no saikento― 円 測 に よ る五 性 各 別 の
肯定 について ― 円測 思想 に対 する皆成 的解釈 の再検 討―.Bukkyogaku仏
pp. 95-117.
Matsumoto Shiro松 本 史 朗 。1982."Yuishikiha no ichijo shiso ni tsuite-ichijo
教学40,
shiso no Daigaku
kenkyu(II)"唯識
Bukkyo Gakubu Sakuma Hidenori佐
派 の 一 乗 思 想 につ いて― 一 乗 思 想 の研 究(II).Komazawa
Ronshu駒 澤 大 学 佛 教 学 部 論 集13, pp. 290-312.
久 間 秀 範2006."Yugagyoha no jissen riron ga kyogi riron ni kawaru
toki"瑜 伽 行派 の実 践理 論 が教 義理論 に変わ る時Tetsugaku Shiso Ronshu哲 学 ・思
想 論 集31,pp. Takasaki Jikido高
izo Shuppan大
Yoshimura Makoto吉 村 誠.2000. "To shoki ni okeru gosho kakubetsu setsu ni tsuite-
Enjiki to Ki no giron o chushin ni"唐 初期 における五姓 各別説 について― 円測 と基
1-15.
崎 直 道.1980. Ryogakyo楞 伽 経.Butten koza仏 典 講 座17. Tokyo: Da-
蔵 出 版.
の議 論 を 中心 に.Nihon Bukkyo" Gakkai Nenpo日 ―.2004. "Yuishiki gakuha no gosho kakubetsu
本 仏 教 学 会 年 報65, pp. 179-196,
setsu ni tsuite"唯識 学 派 の 五 姓 各 別 Kenkyu Kiyo駒 澤 大 学 佛 教 学 部 研
説 につ い て.Komazawa
究 紀 要62, pp. 223-258.
Daigaku Bukkyo Gakubu
―.2005. Chugoku yuishiki shisoshi nyumon中 国 唯識 思 想 史 入 門.Tokyo: Tokyo Gi- jutsu Kyokai東 京 技 術 協 会.
Becauseof strict restrictionson space, all notes have had to be omitted. Referenceshould be made to my articles in Japanese dealing with the same subject, including aparinirvana- dharma, which it was not possible to deal with here.
(This study is supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) (2005-2007) from JSPS)
〈Key Words〉 gotra, agotra, Yogacara, five-gotra system
(Professor,University of Tsukuba, Ph.D & D.Litt) 1120
