 (128) JournalofIndianandBuddhistStudiesVol.55,No.3,March2007
On the Seventh Abode in Kukai's
Ten Abodes of Mind of the Mysterious Mandala
Sanja JURKOVIC
"The mind realizing non -origination of the mind"(覚 心 不 生 住 心)is the name
of the seventh abode in Kukai's model of the ten abodes of mind, which is related to
the teachings of the Chinese Sanlun(三 論)tradition. The name of this abode is
based on the concept appearing in the first chapter of the Mahavairocanasutra, in the passage which describes the yogic practice of the second kalpa.1) In relation to
Putixi lun(Treatise on Bodhicitta,菩 提 心 論), which is the other primary source fbr the
establishment of the model of ten stages, 2)the seventh stage in the Kukai's model corresponds to that aspect of Mahayana practice which emphasizes the realization
of emptiness of all phenomena(一 切 法 空).3)Beginning with the seventh stage, Kukai directs the attention of the practitioner towards the mind itself, initiating the process
of the realization of non-origination of the mind(心 不 生). Stages seven and eight re一 veal the process of the realization of emptiness until its complete transcendence at the ninth stage.
1.
Kukai presents the teaching of the Sanlun tradition, almost exclusively on the ba-
sis of Jizang's(吉 蔵)writings on the topic of the two truths(二 諦)and the eightfold negation(八 不), in San lun xuan yi(The Profound Meaning of the Three Treatises,(三 論 玄 義)and Da cheng xuan lun(The Profound Meaning of Mahayana,(大 乗 玄 論). The purpose
of the eightfold negation at the seventh abode is to cut off all"mental manifoldness" (prapanca,戯 論)and bring the practitioner to a tranquil state of mind, wherein he re一 alizes the non-origination of the mind. However,it seems that Kukai considers the Sanlun realization of emptiness as remaining on a rather theoretical level. In the text of the eighth stage he states, that "bodhisattvas of the previous eon [the sixth and the seventhabode] still engagein mental manifoldness."4)Moreover,he regards the eighth abode as the place of mind which is "unconditioned and without charac-
-1156-
 late the concepts ing"(有)respectively,
of"emptiness"and"provisionality"with``non-being"(無)and"be-
and to posit them as two ontological realities, Tiantai master
Zhiyi(智 頻)emphasized "three insights in the
the concept of the three truths(三 諦)and the meditation of single thought"(一 心 三 観)
,in order to provide a more pro一
On the Seventh Abode in Kukai's
Ten Abodes of Mind of the Mysterious Mandala (S. JURKOVIC) (129)
teristics," and it "explains nonduality as neither existent nor nonexistent
text of the seventh abode, Kukai extensively quotes Jizang's writings on the incor-
rect understanding of the middle way(中 道)on the basis of the concept of two
truths.') The theory of the two truths was a subject of many debates among Chinese Buddhist scholars, especially in the fifth and the sixth century, and was a conve- nient tool to use in order to point out the false understanding of other traditions. Sanlun is especially known for the concept of "destroying the false and revealing the correct"(破 邪 顕 正), which was developed by Jizang. Kukai does not use this concept in relation to the Sanlun teaching in the seventh abode, but he refers to pas- sages in which Jizang refutes the wrong understanding of the Pi tang, Cheng Se, and She lun(撮 論)traditions, and generally the other teachers(of the Liang dynasty)
in relation to the two truths. Due to the tendency of earlier Sanlun scholars7)to re-
found insight into the meaning of the middle way. Although Kukai fully acknowl- edged the importance of the concept of two truths, he may have had a slightly nega- tivistic view towards the practical results of the Sanlun way of practice and meditation, in terms of the realization of the middle way. The Tiantai concept of the three truths might have seemed to Kukai to be practically more conduciveto the re- alization of the true meaning of the middle way. In Unji gi (Meaningsof the Syllable Hum,件 字 義), he concisely states that the"three truths interpenetrate perfectly(三 諦
圓 渉)"8)Furthermore, in the text of the eighth abode, he emphasizes the Tiantai method of"calming and contemplation"(止 観 道)and refers specifically to the medi- tation of "three insights in the single thought," which brings insight into emptiness, dependent origination, and the middle way.9)
2.
The concept of Buddha-nature must have been extremely important for Kukai as the whole Shingon practice is based on the idea of the original identity of sentient beings and Buddha. The depth of insight into the meaning of the original Buddha- nature of mind may be one of the criteria for positioning the different teachings at
-1157-
." 5) In the
 On the Seventh Abode in Kukai's
(130) TenAbodesofMindoftheMysteriousMandala (S.JURKOVIC)
their respective places, when considering the progressive aspect of the ten abodes .
In expounding the meaning of the sixth abode
, related to the Faxiang(法 相)teach-
ing, Kukai emphasizedthe developmentof bodhicitta in a relative sense(samrttika-
bodhicitta,世 俗 菩 提 心). In relation to the realization of Buddha-nature, in Unji gi he
criticizes the Faxiang view stating: "To teach that this possesses it, while that does not, is nothing more than a provisional doctrine."10) Considering the seventh abode , it is known that Jizang wrote a lot on the meaning of Buddha-nature." It is conside- red that it was the influence of Jizang that later Sanlun scholars held the view that "grasses and trees have a Buddha -nature ."12)However, Kukai did not seem to find it significant to emphasize insight into Buddha-nature at the seventh stage. On the contrary, in Unji gi he states that "rejecting existence and establishing non-exis- tence, is diminution and decrease," which "cuts constantly the Buddha-nature, al- though the original Buddha is without diminution and without decrease."") Within the tenfold model of abodes, realization of Buddha-nature happens at the eighth abode of"the mind of the unconditioned one way"(一 道 無 為 心), which is related to the Tiantai(天 台)tradition. Kukai characterizes the eighth abode with the realiza- tion of the principle of original purity(本 来 清 浄 理)14)On the basis of the practice of
"calming and
gamasamadhi(首
to be unsatisified
功 用)"15)The
contemplation
," the practitioner of the eighth abode attains suram-
楞 嚴 三 昧), which is another name for Buddha-nature. with the Madhyamika approach as being"devoid
state of activity, transcending the state of stagnation
Zhiyi seems of functions(無
in emptiness, is
also an important factor for Kukai in the establishment of the ninth stage.16 From the same perspective, it can be concluded that Kukai considered Tiantai insight into emptiness, as it relates to the realization of Buddha-nature, as more profound than the Sanlun approach.
3.
The esoteric approach to the seventh abode is related to the "samadhi of great
emptiness"(大 空 三 昧)of Bodhisattva Manjusri, who embodies both exoteric and eso-
teric aspects of the teaching on emptiness. On the basis of the Mahavairocana- sutra, Kukai presents his mantra: "He he kumaraka vimuktipathasthita smara smara
pratijnana."17) The meaning of this mantra is calling for the prince who is abiding in the way of liberation to recall the vows taken in his previous existences. The esote-
-1158-
 On the Seventh Abode in Kukai's
Ten Abodes of Mind of the Mysterious Mandala (S. JURKOVIC)
(131)
ric interpretation of this mantra is condensed in the syllable "ma," which means emptiness. Manjusri's esoteric aspect is the "Tathagata of no mental manifoldness" (無 戯 論 如 来).In esoteric teaching, he teaches the"wheel of revolving syllables," which is the samadhi of the five letters(五 字 輪)" a ra pa ca na."18)
4. Conclusion
The seventh stage has the function of initiating the process of the development of
bodhicitta at the ultimate level(paramarthikabodhicitta,勝 義 菩 提 心), which is subse-
quently deepened at the eighth and ninth stages. Compared to the later stages, the Sanlun teaching is still engaged in "mental manifoldness," and the discrimination
between subject and object is not yet transcended. Kukai's preference for the Tiantai teaching, instead of the Sanlun, is due to the Tiantai's emphasis on the realization of Buddha-nature,which may be interpreted as a positive aspect of emptiness. It may be stated that, in the context of the ten abodes, Kukai ignored the aspect of Sanlun teaching related to the developmentof Jizang's theory on Buddha-nature. However, his intention may not have been to present the Sanlun tradition's teaching from its own doctrinal standpoint; Kukai emphasized those aspects of Sanlun teaching which are conducive to the progress of a mantra practitioner, based on the Mahavairocanasutra and Putixi lun. His approach to the Sanlun tradition is from the perspectiveof the Shingonabode,which considers the main historicalMahayana teachings to be different entrances (dharmaparyaya)1t9o) the same teaching, repre- sented by the samadhis of four bodhisattvas of the central eight-petalledlotus divi- sion of the Garbha mandala.
1) TheoriginaltextreferstotheMahayanapracticeonly.Taishoshinshudaizokyo(ab- breviatedasT.)18,p.3b9-14K.ukaiinterpretedthispassageastwostagesandrelates themto the sixthand the seventhabodein his TenAbodesof Mindof theMysterious Mandala(秘 密 曼荼羅十 住 心 論)and Precious Key to the Mysterious Treasury(秘 蔵 宝 鑰),『 定 本 弘 法 大 師 全 集 』2,3(abbreviated as T.Z.),高 野 山1993.
2) Putixilunisespeciallyimportantfortheestablishmentofthemodeloftenprogressive stages in Precious Key to the Mysterious Treasury.
3) T.32, p.573b.10-14. 4) T.Z.3, p.169.
5) ibid.
6)In San lun xuan yi, Jizang refutes the wrong views of non-Buddhists, Pi tang(毘 曇),
-1159-
 On the Seventh Abode in Kukai's
(132) TenAbodes of Mind of the Mysterious Mandala (S. JURKOVIC)
Cheng Se(成 実)traditions, and the false understanding of Mahayanists. T.45, pp.1-14.
Jizang was particulary vigorous in refuting views of Cheng Se scholars. Paul L. Swan- son: T'ien-tai Philosophy, Asian Humanities Press, 1989, pp.82ff.
See Whalen W. Lai: Sinitic understanding of two truths in the Liang dynasty (502- 557),PhilosophyEast and West,vol. 28, no.3,Universitypress of Hawaii, 1978.
T.Z.3, p.63.
7)
8) 9)
ment(五 性).
ll)On Jizang's theory of the middle way as a direct cause of Buddha-nature(中 道 仏 性)
and refutation of other different theories on the direct cause of Buddha-nature present at his time, see T.45, pp.35b-37a. Also, see Ming-Wood Liu: The Yogacara and Madhy- amika Interpretation of the Buddha-nature Concept in Chinese Buddhism, Philosophy East and West, vol. 35, no.2, pp.177ff, 1985; The Early Development of the Buddha-na- ture Doctrine in China, Journal of Chinese Philosophy, vol. 16, 1989.
12)平 井俊栄:『 中国般若思想史研究』春秋社1973,p.634.
13) T.Z.3, p.63. 14) T.Z.3,p.271.
15) NG Yu-Kwan: T'ien-t'ai Buddhism and Early Madhyamika, University of Hawaii Press, 1993,pp.58ff.
16) SeeJurkovicSanja:OntheNinthStageinKukai'sTenAbodesoftheMindofthe Mysterious Mandala - In Relation to the "Mind Which Transcends No Self-nature", Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies, vol.53, no.2, March 2005.
17) T.Z.2,p.157.
18)On the meaning of the mantra, see酒 井紫郎:「文殊菩 薩 の五字咒 法 に就いて」『密 教 文 化 』18,1952.
19)生 井智紹:「曼茶羅と多様不二の理論」,『曼茶羅の諸相』,法蔵館,2005. 〈Key Words〉 覚心 不生心,大 空 三昧,十 住 心論 三論
(Researcher, Koyasan University Research Institute for Esoteric Buddhist Culture)
T.Z.2, p.267.
10) T.Z.3,p.63.ThiscriticismreferstoFaxiang'sclassificationofpeopleintofivegroups
according to their different, inherent predispositionstowards the attainment of enlighten-
-1160-
