 Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007 (133 )
Robes of Rags (funzoe) and Silk in the Edo Period: Menzan Zuiho and Ueda Shohen Interpret the Practice of the Buddhist Robe
Diane RIGGS
I. Introduction:
During the Edo period, interest in reviving the precepts spread throughout the major sects of Buddhism. Those monks with strong commitment to the movement would
pledge themselves in private ceremonies(jiseijikai自 誓 持 戒)to uphold the full two hundred and fifty Buddhist precepts(gusoku kai具 足 戒). Based on the interpreta-
tion of the precepts of the Shibunritsu(四 分 律)promoted by the Chinese Vinaya Master, Daoxuan(Jpn:Dosen道 宣596-667), they also practiced wearing linen and cotton robes exclusively,avoiding silk robes, the normal garb for the time. They chose muted colors and soon came to be recognized by the dull color and wrinkled appearance of their robes, even causing them to be accepted as a separate interest group by the Edo Bakufu (NishimuraRyo2003). Such robes also fit in with a long- standing practice in Japanese Buddhism of associating black or dull colored robes with recluses and ascetics (Osumi1965).
These reformers presented themselves as returning to a more pure Buddhist prac-
tice, but in Indian Buddhist literature, it is the rag robe(funzoe糞 掃 衣Skt:pamsukula)
that is traditionally associated with ascetic practice. Ideally this includes picking up discarded cloth, washing and dyeing the pieces to a uniform color and sewing them into robes. The ten types of cloth suitable for rag robes are defined in the Shibunritsu by the use to which the cloth was put before it was cast away. These ten
types of cloth have been:
1. chewed by cows; 2. chewed by rodents; 3. burnt; 4. used for. menstruation; 5. used in childbirth ; 6. carried away from the shrine by birds, animals or the wind; 7. taken from a graveyard; 8. used for petitionary rites to the gods; 9. discarded when receiving employ-
-1161-
 (134) RobesofRags(funzoe)andSilkintheEdoPeriod(D.RIGGS)
ment from the king; 10. used to wrap a corpse (T 22. #1428, 850a).
Although Edo period Buddhists knew about the rag robe, the practice was not as widespread as the use of linen and cotton robes. Why did Edo monks in the pre- cepts movement emphasize rejecting silk instead of moving to adopt the practice of the rag robe? In this paper I examine how two authors during this period described these two types of religious practice.
II. The practice of the Rag robe as described by Menzan Zuiho
The Teachings of the Buddha's Dharma Robe『 釈 氏 法 衣 訓 』,written in 1768 by the Soto Zen scholar-monk, Menzan Zuiho(面 山 瑞 方1683-1769)uses a wide selec- tion of citations to advocate the living practice of wearing the robe. Menzan ex-
plains that he was motivated to write the piece because contemporary forms and
practices were concerned only with the robe as decoration of the body and hence violated what he considered to be the first principle of the Buddhist robe: to achieve
the solemnity of the Dharma Body. Menzan relies on two essays, Kesa kudoku(袈 裟 功徳)and Den'e(伝 衣), written in 1241 by Dogen(1200-1253), founder of the Soto
Zen school. In these essays Dogen praised the rag robe as most worthy of reverence. Whereas the writings of his contemporaries typically mention the rag, robe only briefly, Menzan cites fifteen different sources, including four citations from the Shibunritsu, Jujuritsu and Uburitsu vinaya and commentaries; three from Chinese treatises; and five from scriptures. Menzan clearly saw the rag robe as key to under- standing the meaning of the Buddha'srobe.
In discussing the practice of the rag robe, Menzan cites the Maharatnakuta (Jpn:
Daiho shakukyo大 宝 積 経)three times. In the first instance, he merely comments
briefly that the contemplations on the merit of the Buddha's relics described in this scripture apply equally to the rag robe. He also cites the six contemplations of pick- ing up rags for making robes which occur in three stages of development. First, the two contemplations of the- knowledge of what is necessary for nurturing the good give rise, second, to the two contemplations of lack of pride and a determination to accumulate good qualities. Third, this mental state in turn promotes thoughts of not adorning the body and commanding a pure heart. Menzan emphasizes that the rag robe by its nature leads one towards the Buddha's teaching, and that is the source of
-1162-
 Robesof Rags(funzoe)andSilkin the EdoPeriod(D. RIGGS) (135)
its merit. His final citation describes the rag robe practice of an ideal postulant (sha-
mi 沙彌 Skt:Sramanera):
BuddhasaidtoMahakasyapalo,okatpostulantShuna(Skt:Cunda)whopickedupsome- thingfromthemidstofimpuresmellyandfilthyrags,atelittle,andwhenfinishedeating
wenttothegreatpoolofAnoku.Hewasabouttowashthemwhentheheavenlybeings who livedaroundthe edge of the pond camefrom far awayto greet him. They bowed their heads downto him in reverenceand all rejoicedin purity.Theytook the impure rags (funzo)whichShunahad pickedup andwashedthemso that the impurityentirely disappearedT.heythentookthewashingwatertowashtheirownbodies.Alltheheavenly beingsknewthatShunacouldmaintainthe purepreceptsandentereveryconcentration of meditationandhad greatvirtue,so forthis reasontheycameout to welcomehim as a noblepersonandpaidobeisanceto him(T.11#310,647.1).
By citing the Maharatnakuta frequently in this section Menzan emphasizes the con- nection between the rag robe and Mahakasyapa, a figure strongly associated with the ascetic practices, includingthe rag robe. In Zen Buddhism, Mahakasyapais be- lieved to have directly received the transmission of the teaching from Sakyamuni and to have been entrusted with a robe for the future Buddha, Maitreya (Silk,2003). Menzan suggests how the practice of the rag robe could be incorporated into a life of contemplationand worship practices and that it is the proper attire for the simple asceticism portrayed by the postulant ShUna.But Menzan is not simply citing scrip- tural passages as an ideal of the past. A patchwork robe stored at Eifuku-an in Obama, Fukui-ken believed to have been made and worn by Menzan suggests that he recreated the physical practice of the rag robe as well. This worn and much patched garment is clearly not simply a demonstration project, but rather has seen years of use.
III. The practice of the non-silk robe as described by Ueda Shohen
According to the vinaya, materials for the funzoe are discarded cloth and therefore indirectly received from the laity, but vinaya literature also establishes rules of di- rect donation from the laity who received merit in return. These "ten kinds of robes" in the Shibunritsu refer to the types of fiber used in making the cloth, name- ly: linen (3 types),silk (2 types),wool (2 types),cotton, feathers and fabric made from
-1163-
 (136) RobesofRags(funzoea)ndSilkintheEdoPeriod(D.RIGGS)
wood (T22.#1428,602.1).Although each of the five vinaya specify that silk is suit- able for robes, Daoxuan argued that since silk production involves killing silk
worms, accepting it hinders the practice of compassion.Although not a violation of these rules, Daoxuan ruled that silk was inappropriate for Mahayana monks. The
prohibitionreferred only to cloth directly donated from the laity, not to rag robes. A rejection of silk would therefore have an impact on the relationship between the
monks and the laity.
The arguments for and against the use of silk in robes came under intense scrutiny by Edo period scholar-monks who promoted a return to the vinaya. These argu- ments are reviewedand discussedby a Shingonrisshu scholar-monk,Ueda Shohen (上 田 正 遍1828-1908)in his Treatise on the Proper Practice of Daoxuan's Prohibition
of Silk Robes『 南 山 律 宗 袈 裟 禁 絹 順 正 論 』(Shohen 1880). Shohen's work is signifi-
cant because he discusses the textual evidence for the abstract moral principle of the anti-silk position from the practical viewpoint of one who has incorporated this po-
sition in his own religious practice.
One of the issues raised in the treatise is whether or not one may receive silk for
robes second hand. In this case, one is remote from the action of killing as the cloth
has already passed through many hands. As the object was not ordered by the
monk, but was received already made up into the garment, one cannot say that the
monk is guilty of having intended the killing of the silkworms to make the cloth.
As Yijing(Jpn:Gijo義 淨635-713)comments,"lf one discusses killing, first there is
the intention of cutting off a life; this is how karmic action is completed. If it is not
intentional at all then it is not a sin. Three conditionsmust be met: intention, action
and the result. If these three aspects are in accord with the monastic rules (i.e.they
are pure),then there is no fault." (T54.#2125,212.3).In response to this Shohen ar-
gues that if one uses silk, one contributes to the total economy of silk production: Thosewhodeeplyvaluecompassionh,owcan theycovetandwearthe silkthatcauses
moreandmoreharmto life?If onewearsit thenonedesiresit andthiscrushesone's compassionandincreasesone'sbadkarma.If I wearsilkthensomeonewillincreasingly harmlivingbeingsbymakingsilk.IfIdonotwearitthenthatkillingwillend.Thatsin
-1164-
 Robesof Rags(funzoe)and Silk in the EdoPeriod(D. RIGGS) (137)
and merit starts with me. (Shohen 305.2)
Shohen argues that one must see one's own responsibility for the entire sequence of
actions involved in making the cloth. Even if the silk is secondhand, using it en- courages silk production as a whole. Shohen emphasizes this idea of a global re- sponsibility at the end of the treatise where he cites the Shijiki「 四 分 律 行 事 鈔 資 持 記 」,acommentary on Daoxuan's work by Yuanzhao(Jpn:Ganjo元 照1048-1116). In the passage he suggeststhat the mentalworld of the bodhisattva is substantiallydif- ferent because he is able to imagine the whole chain of relationships that lie behind the presence of the object: "A Bodhisattva imagines that which comes from afar. Even if one is removed from the act of killing, one is not without the action of kill- ing. Stepping with the foot or wearing things on the body, one is saturated with kar- ma." (Shohen309.2)
As these examples show, one aspect of this practice is contemplative. Instead of tracking one's own mental, physical and verbal actions to ensure that they are in ac- cord with the monastic rules, one enters a contemplation of all possible connections beyond the perameter of one's own intentions and actions. This practice of avoiding silk robes, however,raises other ethical problems. How does the monk who avoids using silk deal with a donor who comes bearing a gift made of silk?
Shohen explains various solutions to this problem. Yijing, who accepted the use of silk explained, "If a donor brings an offering with a pure mind then recite a bene- diction, and accept it, saying, `(Thisgift) sustains me and nurtures your virtue.' Truly this is no error."(T.54#2125,212.3)But Shohenfeels that Yijing'ssolutionis insuffi-
cient:
If thereis a donorwhobrings(silk),then youmustexplainit to him rightawayso that he
realizestheimportoftheteaching.Ifyoudoso,thenhemustexchangeitforclothsuchas cottonanddonateit. Or,onecanenquireaboutthe donor'sintentionr,eceiveit anduse it
forgarmentsotherthanrobes(kesa),thenitis nota violation(Shohen306.1).
That is, the monk guards the purity of his practice by teaching the laity to bring a -1165-
 (138) Robesof Rags(funzoe)andSilkin the EdoPeriod(D.RIGGS)
more appropriate donation. Shohen cites another solution that Daoxuan proposed:
"Reading the vinaya, I saw that if one receives a mat (gagu) already made of silk, one should shred it and, mixing it up with hard soil, daub it (on the wall). By this
means I doubled my reverence for the rules of the vinaya (T45.#1898,879.3,18-19)." By accepting the silk but later destroying it, the monk followsthe rule for accepting
donations,but satisfies Daoxuan'srule by destroyingthe inappropriategift.
IV. Conclusion:
Both Menzan and Shohen describe these two types of robes in terms of contempla- tions. For Menzan, the rag robe promotes a contemplation of frugality and the meaning of the impure becoming pure through ascetic practice. For Shohen, the contemplation considers the chain of relationships that lead back to the act of killing silk worms, and is ruthless in excising the impurity of even a strand of silk. One senses in both authors a longing for a past era in which the robe was properly re- spected and understood, and a dedication to the idea of the robe as a sacred gar- ment. While both are grappling with the dissonance between their ideal and the 're- ality of contemporary Edo period Buddhist practices, they are equally determined to manifest this ideal in their daily practice. Their ideas are shaped by reading texts, however, rather than by traditionally transmitted teachings. In this sense, they are both involved in the reconstruction of the physical robe and its religious practices through texts.
Bibliography
Menzan Zuiho. 1768."Shakushi hoe kun." In Dai Nihon bukkyozensho, v. 73, 207-219. Nishimura Ryo. 2003. "Kaiko no koe: kinsei ritsuzo ni okeru kene kinshi ni tsuite." In NihonBukkyoso-g5kenkyu1.
Osumi Kazuo. 1965."Tonseini tsuite." In HokkaidoDaigaku bungakubu kiyo.
Ueda Shohen. 1880. "Nanzan Risshu kesa kinken junsho ron." In *Dai Nihon
bukkyo zensho*,v. 74, 304-310.
(The research for this paper was supported by the Numata Fellowship administrated by Ryukoku University)
〈Key Words〉 Kasaya, pamsukula,禁 絹,上 田 照 遍,面 山 瑞 方
(Visiting Researcher, Ryukoku University) -1166-
