 (148) Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007
The Symbolism of Hokke-Proper(II)
A Biocentric Drama upon the Stage in the Middle-Heaven(I)
consists of only 6 chapters:Introduction, Gushing out of 60.000 Bodhisattvas, Entrusting of Saddharma.
KOTANI
Yukio
These are the unknown accomplishments(from
Japanese private scholar, Hanjiro Tominaga(富
the basis of his own practical exercise of Sakyamuni's teachings and of his own ve- rification of sanskrit and pali texts, to sift out what were thought to be original parts of Hokke (Lotus Sutra)from the annexed complete set of recurrent prajna thoughts. It
a on
Skilful Access, Contemplation of a Stupa, Measuring of Merits of Tathagata and
subjective because of its being judgement.
[Pundarika(in the mental process)]What has been traditionally called〈mind〉is ally nothing but the fruit in which one has concepionally fixed this mental process.
The following is a paraphrased explanation
[Saddamma(of a man's Buddha-like judgement)]〈sat〉(true being)appears
indeed in an individual as objective existence, the original essence of a 〈dhamma〉is strictly
[Suta(the text, which explains the ground and the necessity of a primordial creation with practical methodologies themselves). Under the adverse impetus of a wrong view, which the two yanas and the third yana held on the〈saddhamma〉as objective, the au- thor of Lotus Sutra Proper(根 本 法 華)corrected the error throughout. That is the very theme of this sutra.
Firstly the sutra's title presents〈Saddhamma〉, and that indicates the main point
of the〈Saddhamma〉as subject, and also suggests this point as an idiom by having it followed by the significant term〈Pundarika〉. This is such a traditionally effec-
tive word for the India intelligentsia that it suggests to the hearers of this sutra with- out fail a certain common association and makes them anticipate a sequence as fol- lows:Brahma-Veda-Pundarika-Akasa-Atman.
-1176-
the years ca 1933-19631))of
永 半 次 郎2)),(1883-1965), who tried,
of the sutra's title3):
re-
 The Symbolism of Hokke-Proper(II)(Y. KOTANI) (149)
The author induces them along these expectations as the story advances,and
baffles them suddenly, ―as soon as it arrives at the end of the chapter of
〈Contemplation of a Stupa〉and the beginning of〈Bodhisattvas' Gushing out of the Earth〉, ―by absolving and dissipating traditional mannerisms by means of dexterous plots full of symbolisms:Buddha-Saddharma-Pundarika-Akasa-
Bodhisattva4).
For the historical background of its composition, various problems in the ancient Indian Buddhist assemblage(samgha)of the Christian era must be considered.:the teachings left behind by Buddha, misunderstandings of His successive disciples about them, schisms according to the opposing opinions, the Edicts by King Asoka, the recurrence of nirvana thought and the question of right or wrong about the wor- ship of stupa. Tominaga assumed an unknown bhiksu, who could create a drama with multivocal symbolisms in order to manifest Buddha-like phenomena, even by remodelling the non-Buddhist, indigenous sources of Chandogya-Upanisad,
Ramayana and Samkhya philosophy. Its outline is as follows:
I.Introduction-Skilful Access
Once upon a time the Bhagavat was staying at Rajagriha, on the Gridhrakuta- mountain, with a numerous assemblage of monks... surrounded, attended, venera- ted by them. He sat cross-legged and at this time entered into. a mental attitude be- yond description, the intense meditation, called〈ananta-nirdesa-pratisthana〉(that
is, mental state against infinite expositions. On looking aghast at this unprecedented appearance, that both his body and his mind was motionless, they were all surprised and wondered why He entered into the mysterious meditation.
In the beginning of the next chapter of〈Skilful Access the Bhagavat rises up, holding remembrance and intelligence of the intense meditation, and speaks to Sariputra about an incomprehensible difficulty of only one Buddhist yana(vehicle)
for the believers of the two yanas and the third yana. Thus occurs to each mind the question:"What is Buddha?, the answer to which is the very theme of the next chapter of〈Contemplation of Ratna-Stupa〉.
-1177-
he
 (150) The Symbolism of Hokke-Proper(II)(Y. KOTANI)
II.Development
"Then there arose a Stupa
, consisting of seven precious substances, from the place of the earth opposite the Lord, the assembly being in the middle, a Stupa five hun-
dred yoganas in height and proportionate in circumference."(as translated.by H.Kern5)) The〈ratna〉of〈ratna-stupa〉signifies the merits of tri-ratna(three jewels):Buddha, Dharma and Bhuksu.
Then, why on earth did stupa come to be an object of reverence as well as
Buddha?... Even if one actually enshrined the relic, it must have come naturally into question in the Buddhist samgha, how it ought to be to deify it truly, not to be
confined to being the result of a simple ceremony. As for the Sarira(relic)of Sakya,
it is nothing but the dharma, which he left behind. His judgements or acts in his lifetime are in other words saddharma, but after His death it remained a single dharma, since the assurer of it did not exist anymore. Furthermore, as for Sakya, there existed nothing but this dharma on the part of the samgha, which depended
only upon the mind of bhiksus. Inasmuch as Buddha is Dharma, which depends upon bhiksus,〈the Contemplation of Stupa〉ought to be interpreted in such a con- text. In short, the stupa, as symbol of the bequeathed dharma of Buddha, ought to be contemplated in their minds. The question is whether a bhiksu can become a Buddha or not. We ought to pay attention to the insinuative meaning of〈five〉of
〈five hundred yojanas〉, by relating all the mental events to the working of five skandha(aggregate). The living Dharma during the Buddha's lifetime, i.e. saddhar- ma, became, after His death, mere objectively fixed dharma in the memory of many bhiksus, which were in various ways modified, degraded and transferred through the opposing opinions, and schisms of sects to the anonymous author of Lotus Sutra Proper, and he intended, in this chapter, to rectify the distorted views on Buddha and dharma in the samghas' bhiksus, and to make their stereotyped dharma a truly living one. Here we have suddenly sabda(an authoritative voice), affirmative for the
preaching of Buddha, from within the stupa:"sadhu, sadhu bhagavan Sakyamune subhasita te'yam Saddharmapundariko dharma-paryayah,"(Excellent, excellent, Lord
Sakyamuni, thou hast well expounded this Dharmaparyaya of the Lotus of the True Law.6)) Except the traditionally Indian word of〈pundarika〉(a white lotus, symbolising excel-
-1178-
 The Symbolism of Hokke-Proper(II)(Y. KOTANI) (151)
lent mind), almost all words derive from the Asoka's Edict(Calcutta Bairat) . So the main point is:by way of what sort of circumstances becomes〈pundarika〉
〈saddharma〉;and it is solely for this,that Bhagavat Sakya preached in various
(for a sole object to open the eyes of creatures for the sight of Tathagata-know- ledge〉.
Removal of two pieces-crushing of a logocentric conception
ways
Logocentricity is an antonym of biocentricity, which we use as subtitle of this study. According to the definition7)of Ludwig Klages(1872-1956), the former is cha- racterised by the overestimation of conscience, calculation and mechanic causality on the basis of will and grasping comprehension.
Now, the owner of glorifying utterance from within the stupa is a dead Buddha, Prabhutaratna Tathagata. The preaching Buddha explains to Mahapratibhana the former's long-fostered wish during his life-time, namely to have〈a stupa of atma- bhava-vigraha〉(perfect stupa to the memory of his soul)erected and to emerge, emitting
a sabda, wherever the saddharma is preached, and in addition, under grave condi- tion, to have all his other selves in ten directions assembled.
So the Bhagavat emits a streak of white ray from his brow,illuminating all the buddhas of fifty hundred thousand koti nayuta worlds of ten directions, equal to the Ganga...They all send their respective messengers to the Bhagavat, consenting to open the stupa. Then He ascends to the stupa in the Middle-Heaven, removes two pieces of the stupa by scooping out by the right(=able)hand in its center-symboli-
sing the removal of opposing two concepts, in order to show a Whole Unity―, and, welcomed by the Prabhutaratna shares the semi-seat with him. Consenting the as- sembly on the earth to ascend to contemplate the two Buddhas, the living Buddha makes by his growth of idealising power the four audiences rise up to the Middle- Heaven. Here is then accomplished a right theoretical contemplation of what is Buddha.
III. Climax-a biocentric drama
So the Bhagavat proclaims His view,"Who of ye can make manifest the Saddharma Pundarika Dharma Paryaya in this world? I will entrust this to a quali-
-1179-
 (152) The Symbolism of Hokke-Proper(II)(Y. KOTANI)
fied one before my death. Now it is justly high time for that,"
After Mahapratibhana, five hundred scholared bhikshus in the assembly accord
with the proposal, hoping to do in another worlds. Just then bodhisattvas from other worlds stand up, and after having joined their hands and worshipped, beg the Bhagavat to permit them to do the missionary work in this world. As soon as He thunders,"Cut it out, ye bodhisattvas!", the earth quivers and splits everywhere, and from every rip immeasurable bodhisattvas emerge from underneath. They have re- mained under the earth, in the akasa world. After their appearance they bow to all the bodhisattvas, fifty-antara(=inner)-kalpa(=incidents of five skandha's〈samskara〉)
elapse, during which both the Bhagavat and four audiences remain solely silent―
as a symptom that neither active nor passive contemplation works owing to
〈akasa〉-and experience the extremely long period of time only as a moment and come to see this world, being amid the akasa and everywhere, filled with bodhisatt- vas. Here we find for the first time a complete working of samskara, as delicately symbolised〈pundarika〉, i.e. a vivid working of enlightened experience is manifest- ed. And He discloses to Maitreyi the identity of innumerable akasa-bodhisattvas,
anyone of whom he has never seen before.
This scene, as well as that with the appearance of stupa, is what we call a biocen-
tric drama on the basis of symbolical thinking. In the center of the question is the unconscious process of a thinking organism with metamorphosis, that seems indeed
a fantastic, irrational mysticism in the so called Tiefenpsychologie. But that which plays an important part behind the scenes is〈soul〉(Seele), not〈spirit〉(Geist). Exactly fitting for this description is the article about〈dramatic〉in a concise COD, which runs as follows:"fit for theatrical representation, sudden, striking, impres- sive."
Let us consider more minutely several original key words as clues to the symbol- ism. The entire earth, symbolised as crust of phantoms about life and world, made solid by our egocentric attachments, quivers tremulously and explodes, and 60.000 bodhisattvas of the underground-world gush out all of a sudden.(In this case, one must regard closely the original meaning of bodhi(enlightenment)and sattva(essence). The symbolism of 60.000, deriving from two Indian classics is already mentioned.)The differ- enciating working of our egocentric intellect from circumstances stops with the dis-
-1180-
 The Symbolism of Hokke-Proper(II)(Y. KOTANI) (153)
appearance of subject and object, producing a sereine state of mind.〈Akasa〉means
an ether-like transparent vacuity, and has in itself nothing intentional to work out to the outside world, while what it produces, on the contrary, presupposes a tremen- dous function, by which one realises a righteousness.〈Akasa〉itself has no func- tional attributes, such as I. Kant regarded as〈unifying power of reason8)〉 . It is not a neologism of the Lotus Sutra Proper, but its source is found in the Chandogya- Upanisad.:"Now in this Brahmapura is a vesma(dwelling), a small pundarika, in which a small akasa is,....the very being in this akasa is what one seeks for and wants to know."(8.1.1). The real value of the original author of Hokke Proper con- sists in creating〈bodhi〉 〈sattva〉in place of〈atman〉as〈the very being>, against the traditionally assumed association.
Seeking to explain the symbolism of this term〈akasa〉, we should comprehend
the changes, which come about by the influence of akasa's exercises upon the work- ing of five skandha, behind the ordinary mental phenomena.
When we analyse and consider speculatively even simple and familiar phenome-
na, which go by only in one second, we can hardly imagine what an innumerable complicated actions take place there in the meantime. Accordingly, when we trans- pose speculatively and analytically our each of our affairs deeply to its composing factors through a converse procedure to our daily idea of time, by distributing it to the unit, we can count it with an enormous span time. The〈pancasat〉(50)symbo-
lises the five skandha. The kaleidoscopic scene of changes, when the momently reations of five skandha's working pervade thoroughly the akasa, has been de- scribed. The genuine symbolism of this〈pancasad-antara-kalpa〉in this text does not express a temporal period. It is the very coexistence of both moment and eterni- ty, and of both here and there As it demonstrates the potentiality of becoming Buddha of five skandha in the akasa, the Sakyamuni's preaching of Saddharma= Upaya-kausalya(Skilfull Access)as Buddha is nothing but the fruits, which this po- tentiality bears. All members of the instructor and the instructed in the assembly
are thoroughly penetrated by the serene state of mind of the Bodhisattvas from the underground. Subsequently the situation is symbolically expressed in the manner of
〈fifty-inner-kalpa, silent meditation〉, in order to call the attention to the situation where actions of five skandha's working, neither subjectively nor objectively, take
-1181-
 (154) The Symbolism of Hokke-Proper(II)(Y. KOTANI)
place.Itisthemanifestationftheverycompletionofsamskara(rddhyabhi-samska- ra),whichcorrespondstotheultimatestateofmind inBuddha'slatesdtays:vaya-
dhamma samkhara9). (Tobecontinued.)
〔Notes〕
1)This period corresponds almost to that of following publications:雑 誌 『一 』(herein-
after abridged as『 一』 富永先 生の會・昭 和12~19年);富 永半 次郎 著/大 野達 之助 ・ 千谷 七郎 ・風間敏 夫 ほか編 『蓮華展 方-原 述作者 の法 華 經(梵 和 對課)』(昭 和27年); 富永半 次郎 著 『釋 迦 佛 陀本 紀余 論』(全21冊 昭和29~38年)
2)小 谷 幸雄 「世界 の中の佛陀現 象 富永半 次郎 の人間學 的事跡」 『印度學 佛 教學研 究』
第47巻-2號 平 成11年3月/252-257頁 3) 『一 』vol.1 pp.2-3 4)『 一』 vol.5 pp.18-19
5)SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST, EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER vol.21, THE SADDHARMAPUNDRIKA OR THE LOTUS OF THE TRUE LAW, translated by H. Kern/Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi etc.1980:p.227 6)ibid. p.236
7)Ludwig Klages:Geist and Leben(SW 3 Philosophie III)Bouvier/Bonn,1974 S.593 8)富 永半次郎述 横澤高記筆 『國體の信念 付・根本法華』 承謹會 昭和17年216頁
cf.The titleof Achter Abschnitt:"Regulatives Prinzip der reinen Vernunft in Ansehung der kosmologischen Ideen"/Zweites Hauptstuck/Zweites Buch/Zweite Abteilung/
Zweiter Teil/1. TRANSZENDENTALE ELEMENTARLEHRE
REINEN VERNUNFT by Imanuel Kant;reclam/Stuttgart 1966 9)『 一』vol.36 pp.18-21;vol.42 pp.24-25
in the KRITIK DER
This paper was prepared by partially correcting an unpublished manuscript, which had
been orally presented during the 5th International Lotus Sutra Conference(4-6 May,2002,
Marburg),entitled "A Biocentric Drama upon the Stage in the Middle-Heaven―chiefly
from the Contemplation of the Ratna-stupa to the Issue of 60.000 Bodhisattvas". We also
tried to avoid the overlapping with what was previously reported in this academic review:
"Th
e Symbolism of Hokke-Proper―Morphological Studies on Saddharma Pundarika Su-
tra by a Private Scholar―(JOURNAL OF INDIAN AND BUDDHIST STUDIES, Vol. LI. No.1.Dec.2002, pp.470-473)
〈key words〉 biocentric, saddharma(<The edict of King Asoka), pundarika(<Chandogya- Upanisad), rddhy abhi-samskara
(Professor Emeritus, Rissho University)
-1182-
