 JournaolfIndiaanndBuddhSisttudieVsol5.5,No.3M,arc2h007 (139)
Background of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory of Daimoku-Juji
the 'Acceptance and Maintenance of the Sutra-title of the Lotus Sutra' WATANABEHO-
1. Acceptance and Maintenance of Sutra-title in Hokke Buddhism
It can be said that one of the especial feature of Nichiren'sHokke Buddhism is that it based on the `Acceptanceand Maintenance of sutra-title of the Lotus Sutra'. It is needless to say, basing on the results of his studies in Buddhist Studiesduring his youth, at the age of 32, Nichiren is said to have declared his faith in the Lotus Sutra through the "Recitation of the sutra-title of the Lotus Sutra" on April 28 in the year 5 of Ken-Cho(1253).
In fact, Nichiren's writings after this incident cohere in contents in alignment
with the idea of `acceptance and maintenance of the title of the Lotus Sutra'
(Daimoku-Juji題 目受持). However, itwas April 25 of the year 10 of Bun-El(1273),20
years later of his first recitation of the title of the Lotus Sutra, that he completed the theoretical explanation of the theory of `Acceptance and Maintenance' of Daimoku.
If we consider the reasons for it, several factors can be pointed out.
(1)As Nichiren had very eventful days, he had to limit himself to the writing of relatively short works in his initial years of missionaryactivity.
(2) Nichiren was living in the social environment, in which a rapid change could take place especiallyin religioussphere.
(3)The fact that Nichiren had to encounter with various Honans(法 難religious persecu-
tions) successively,especially after his presentation of Rissho-Ankoku-Ronto Hojo To- kiyori, the then former regent of the Emperor and the actual leader of Kamakura Sho- gunate on July 16 of the year 1 of Bun-O(1260). The Shi-Dai-Honan(四 大 法 難Four Great ReligiousPersecutions)Nichiren had to undergo are the following:i) the burning of his hermitage one month later of the presentation,ii) Izu Banishment,iii) TojoPer- secution, and iv)Sado Island Banishment, i.e.,(Ryu-Ko-Honan龍 口 法 難)of September 12inthe year 8 ofBun-Ei(1271).
-1167-
 (140) Backgroundof the Formationof Nichiren'sTheoryof Daimoku-Juji(H. WATANABE)
However, through the experiences of such Honan(法 難) , Nichiren could em- body Shiki-Doku(色 読)of 'the Future Prediction of the Lotus Sutra'(法 華 経 の未 来 記).Regarding Shiki-Doku, Nichiren often mentioned that itwas the reading of`the Future Prediction of the Lotus Sutra' through the experience in the process of the life guided by the belief in the Lotus Sutra.
Through such experiences of religious persecutions and difficulties, Nichiren could actualize `the Future Prediction of the Lotus Sutra'. He gradually came to connect the idea of relief from such sufferings by the mercy of the Buddha of Eternal Life(久 遠 本 仏)with the establishment of solid faith to 'Accept and Maintain the Daimoku'. The conceptual theory on the Daimoku-Juji was finally revealed in the Nyorai-Metsugo-Go-Gohyaku-Sai-Shi-Kanjin-Honzon-Sho(如 来滅後五五百歳始 観 心本尊 抄).
In this paper, basing on the interpretations in alignment with tradition of Nichiren Buddhist Studies, holding the question in mind if Nichiren really main- tained silence on Daimoku-Juji for 20 years or not, we intend to examine as much as possiblehis writings to find the idea of Daimoku-Juji'.
2. Elucidation of the Ida of Daimoku-Juji appearing in Nyorai-Metsu- go-Go-Gohyaku-Saishi-Kanjin-Honzon-Sho
As has been mentioned above, though Nichiren declared the foundation of Nichiren Hokke Sect at the age of 32 in the 5th year of Kencho, he never openly
stated the essence and the logic of his teaching. Although the essentials of 'the Acceptanceand Maintenance of the Lotus Sutra' was revealed in Shugo-Kokka-Ron (守 護 国 家 論),which he wrote when he was 38, it was not at all the statement of frank revelation of the essence and logical foundation of Daimoku-Juji.
In Kaimoku-Sho(開 目抄), the work he wrote when he was 51, he revealed the
theory of 'Ichi-Nen-San-Zen',basing on his conviction of being a 'Prophet of the Lotus Sutra' which he gained through his personal experience of religious persecu- tions,andthemeaningoftheDaimoku. However,forthefullexplanationoftheen- tire picture of the theory of Daimoku-Juji, we had to wait until the emergence of Nyorai-Metsugo-Go-Gohyaku-Sai-Shi-Kanjin-Honzon-Show,hichwaswrittenin April 25 of the year 10 of Bun-Ei (1273),when Nichiren was 52. It was after full 20
-1168-
 BackgrounodftheFormatioonfNichiren'TsheoryofDaimoku-Ju(jHi.WATANA(B1E41))
years since his establishmentof his new sect.
Among them, here, we intend to deal with the idea of Daimoku. According to
the traditional understanding, the essence of Nichiren's Daimoku-Juji is shown in thesectionofwhatistraditionallycalled'DaimokunoSanju-sanji Dan'('33charac- ters on Daimoku Section',題 目 の 三 十 三 字 段)or 'Jinen Joyo Dan ('Automatically
Transferred Section',自 然 譲 与 段):"Shaku-son no Ingyo Katoku no ni-ho wa Myo-Ho- Ren-Ge-Kyo no Goji ni gusoku suru. Warera kono Go-ji wo Juji sureba, Jinen ni kano Inga no Kudoku wo Yuzuri Atae Tamau."(釈 尊 の因行果徳 の二 法 は妙法 蓮華 経 の 五字 に具 足す。我等 此の五字 を受持 すれ ば、自然 に彼の因果 の功徳 を譲 り与 えたまう。"The Nidanas and Phalas of the Buddha Sakyamuni are equipPed in the 5 characters of Myo-Ho- Ren-Ge-Kyo. If we accept and maintain the 5 characters of the sutra-title, the Nidanas(因)
and Phalas(果)of the Eternal Buddha would be automatically transferred to us."(Showa Teihon Nichiren Shonin Ibun,立 正 大 学 日蓮 華 教 学 研 究 所 編p.711.)
Summary: Though many sutras were cited, it means that the great cause of
Buddha's religious austerities (Shu-In--No-Gyo-Ho,修 因 の 行 法)and the broad merits the Buddha accumulated(Kan-Ka-No-Toku-Ho,感 果 の 徳 法), all of them are equipped in the 5 characters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo.
The word `Shu-In-No-Gyo-Ho' includes all the religious austerities and reli-
gious trainings the Bodhisattva underwent during 3,000 kalpas of period since his taking vow of attaining Buddhahood and of leading people in North-East region to
salvation. It is shown clearly that the entire religious austerities and trainings the Buddha had undergone are equipped in the 5 Chinese characters of Myo-Ho-Ren- Ge-Kyo. The word 'Kan-Ka-No-Toku-Ho' signifies the entire teaching preached by the Eternal Buddha during his 50 billion kalpas of period in the world of ten direc- tions and in the three periods of the past, the present and the future. The entire mer- its of the Eternal Buddha, which associated with his constantly preached teachings, are equipped in the very 5 characters of Myo-H5-Ren-Ge-Kyo.
Therefore, if we, common people in Mappo age, accept and maintain the 5 characters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo, it says, the entire religious austerities the Eternal Buddha underwent and the whole merits arising out of the teachings of the Eternal Buddha will be handed over to us. That is to say, if a lay man accepts and maintains the 5 characters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo, the religious austerities the
-1169-
 (142)BackgrounodftheFormatioonfNichiren'TsheoryofDaimoku-Ju(jHi.WATANABE)
Buddha with Eternal Life underwent and the entire merits of teachings of the Eternal Buddhawillbe automaticallytransferredto him.
Thus, it is emphasized that the religious training the Buddha underwent since the beginning of the universe and the very missionary activities of the Eternal Buddha since the day of his attainment of the Buddhahood are in the 5 characters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo. So if we accept and maintain the 5 characters, it means that all the Hetus and Phalas of the Eternal Buddha will be automatically trans- ferred to the one who accepts and maintains the Daimoku.
3. The Appeal of Eternal Buddha Sakyamuni to the Innocent Living Beings in Mappo age
Since Heian period, people were tormented by the fear of the arrival of Mappo, the Period of DegeneratedLaw. It seems that the expectationfor being wrapped in the mercy of the Buddha in Mappo period had been something that are beyond our imaginationtoday. ThefoundationofthoseactivitiesforencouragingPureLand Buddhism by Eikan, Genshin, Honenand etc. appears to rest on such expectations.
Contrary, Nichiren questioned the Pure Land Buddhists' attitude of denying all
other Buddhist traditions by bundling them up as Sho-Do-Mon(聖 道 門), and of ad- vocating the idea that the salvation could be attained only through Jo-Do Mon(浄 土
門,Pure Land Gate)。
The main points of Nichiren's criticism appear to rest in the following:
(1)The fact that Pure Land Buddhist did not pay any attention on Shi-Do(此 土),this very
Saha-World.
(2) It is true that various theories exist, if we discuss the matter in detail. Conclusively,we
may be able to point out that Nichiren, basing on Tendai idea of Shaba-Soku.Jakko(娑
婆 即 寂 光),perfected in taking belief in the Grdrakuta Pure Land(霊 山 浄 土)of Eternal
Buddha which he believed to exist in this actual world of suffering. The phrase 'Shaba- Soku-Jakko' appears to mean the fact that the 'Serene Light of Pure Land' should be observed in relation to the reality of this painful Saha-world. Nichiren further believed that the Lotus Sutra should be preached on the Grdrakuta for eternity on the basis of the phrases in Nyorai-Juryo-Hon. It means that we can continue to receive the help of the Eternal Buddha in the Grdrakiita Pure Land.
-1170-
 BackgroundoftheFormationofNichiren'sTheoryofDaimoku-Juji(H. WATANAB(E14)3)
The end section of Kanjin-Honzon-Sho states the following:
Ten Hare nureba, Chi akiraka nari.(天 晴 れ ぬ れ ば 、地 明 らか な り。"If the sky is clear
,it
becomes clear also on the earth.")
Hokke wo shiru monoha, Seho wo ebeki ka.(法 華 を識 る者 は、世 法 を得 べ きか 。"Those
who know the teachings of the Lotus Sutra should attain this worldly knowledge.") Ichi-nen-sanzen wo shirazaru mono niha, Hotoke, Daijihi wo okoshite, Go-ji no uchi ni
kono tama wo tsutsumi, Matsu-dai yo-chi no kubi ni kakesashime tamau.(一 念 三 千 を 識 ら ざる者 には、佛 、大慈 悲を起 こして、五字 の うちにこの珠 をつつみ、末代幼 稚の頸 に懸 けさ
しめたまう。"Tb those who do not have the knowledge of Ichi-Nen-Sanzen, the Buddha,
working his great mercy, make the innocent person living in Mappo period to wear the necklace of the jewel wrapped in 5 characters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo.")
Shidai-bosatsu no kono hito wo Shu-go shi tamawan koto, Tai-ko,Shu-k5 no Sei-O wo shobushi., shiko ga Kei-tei ni jibu seshi ni kotonara zacu mono nari,(四 大 菩 薩 の この 人 を 守 護 したまわん こと、大 公 ・周公 の成 王を摂扶 し、四皓が 恵帝 に侍奉 せ しに異 ならざるもの な り。"The protective attitude of the Four Great Bodhisattvas to the person is as equal as how the ancient Tai-koand Shu-k5 served the King Sei, or how four sages helped the Em- peror Kei.") [Showa TeihonNichiren Shonin Ibun, p.720.]
Summary: If the sky becomes clear, it becomes blight on the earth. According to this natural law, if we ascertain the understanding of Buddhism, it can be said that for those who do not understand the Buddha's teaching of Ichi-Nen-Sanzen, the Eternal Buddha, working his great mercy, wraps the teaching of Ichi-Nen-Sanzen in the 5 characters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo, and makes the people ignorant of the Buddha's teaching wear the necklaces made with the gem.
In the Lotus Sutra, the Buddha with Eternal Life revealed for the first time the existence of Earth Emerging Bodhisattvas whose numbers are equal to those of sands of 60,000 Ganges river, whom the Eternal Buddha had been instructing, and who were unknown even to the immediate disciples of Sakyamuni Buddha. The Buddha ordered the Earth Emerging Bodhisattvas, who are the Hon-Ge-no-Bosatsu (本 化 の 菩 薩,Bodhisattvas instructed by the Eternal Buddha), the missionary activities in this Saha World after the demonstration of the demise of the Buddha. Those origi-
nal disciples were lead by the Four
Bodhisattvas:Jo-Gyo-Bosatsu(上 行 菩 薩
辺 行 菩 薩Bodhisattva Ananta-cari- Visuddha-caritra)and Anryu-Gyo-Bosatsu
Bodhisattva Visista.caritra), tra), Ho-Gyo-Bosatsu(常
Muhen-Gyo-Bosatsu(無 行 菩 薩, Bodhisattva
-1171-
 (144) Background of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory of Daimoku-Juji (H. WATANABE)
(安 立 行 菩 薩,Supratisthita-caritra). There is no doubt for the Four Great Bodhisattvas
to protect the base and inferior people who believe in the significance of the 5 char- acters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo in Mappo period. If we read Chinese history , we find the cases of Ancient Chinese philosophers Tai Gong Wang(太 公 望)and Zhou Gong Dan(周 公旦)assisted the young King Cheng Wang(成 王), and of the four sages, living in Shang-shan(商 山)to avoid war turmoil, who supported the Emperor
Hui Di(恵 帝). Even if the person is base and inferior in nature, if he believe in the significance of the 5 characters of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyot,he disciples of the Eternal Buddha, i.e. the Earth Emerging Bodhisattvas, serve the person as they serve the Eternal Buddha.
Thewordsare socommonlyknowntothe followersofNichirenBuddhismthat they can recite the sentences without mistake as they learned the words by heart. It would be pity for the understanding of Nichiren, if the real importance of the words isnotrealized. HerewecanseehowweshouldrespecttheEternalBuddha,who encompasses the past, the present and the future. Moreover,the words also show the entire picture of guidance of the Eternal Buddha and the nature of salvation of infe- rior people in Mappo.
4. The Spirit of Integration of Buddhist Traditions Behind the idea of Daimoku-Juji
Searching for synthetic understanding of many Buddhist scriptures and for the basis of belief in Buddhism, the Buddhism introduced into China from India in- spired for integrative understanding of Buddhist traditions. Asking for a solution to the above-mentioned subject, the Thirteen Sects of China attempted at arriving to the integrative understanding of Buddhist traditions by using the technique of Kyo- so-Han-Jaku(教 相 判 釈, systematic arrangement in order of sutras, according to contents).
In the Buddhism spread to the North-East region of Asia, strong faiths in Maitreya Bodhisattva and Amitabha Buddha were observed, as has been demon- strated by the construction of formidable images and sculptures. The associating faith in Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva was also prevalent. It is generally known that the Vairocana Buddha of Hua-yen Sutra was installed in Todaiji Temple in Nara in Japan. However, the same Buddha was called differently according to its being
-1172-
 Background of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory of Daimoku-Juji (H. WATANABE()145)
Dharma-kaya(法 身), Samboga-Kaya(報 身)or Nirmana-kaya(応 身)in the light of
Tri-kaya theory.
In China, it is said that construction of large Buddha images on the basis of
Hua-yen Sutra was carried out for integrating many Buddhas appearing in scrip- tures. Thus, it is significant that both the theoretical Kyo-So-Han-Jaku and the spirit for systematic unification of Buddhas at that time were moving towards the integra- tion of Buddhism.
In Japan also, it cant be said that there existed the system of Kokubun ji and
the movement for the establishment of Mahayana Vinaya Platform(円 頓 戒 壇)by
Saicho. If we observe the situation from such standpoint, it seems to be understand- able that Nichiren felt a crisis of Buddhism in Japan, especially facing the rapid de- velopment and spread of Pure Land Buddhism, and that he took a vow to restore the Buddhism on the basis of the teaching of the Lotus Sutra.
In Nyorai-Metsugo-Go-Gohyaku-Sai-Shi-Kanjin-Honzon-Sho, Nichiren speaks thus:
Toute iwaku, kono kyomon no Ken-Shi-Ken-Koku wa Ikan.(問 う て 曰 く、 こ の 経 文 の 遣 使 還 告 は 如 何 。"Question. what does the episode of`Sending messengers to the house to tell the children who lost clear mind'(Ken-Shi-Gen-Koku)mean in the Sutra?")
Kotae to iwaku,
り。..."Answer. It means Four Refuges. They are 4 types of Four Reliable Masters to
whom we can take Refuge.•c)
Shi ni Hon-mon no Si-E, Ji yu Sen-kai wa Mappo no hajime ni shutugen subesi. Ima no Ken-shi-Ken-Koku wa Ji yu nari. Ze-ko-ro yaku towa Juryo-hon no kanjin taru Myo, Tai, Shu, Yo-u, Kyo no Namu-Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo kore nari...(四 に 本 門 の 四 依 地 涌 千 界 は末法 の始 めに出現すべ し。今 の遣使 還告 は、地涌 な り。是好良薬 とは、壽 量品 の肝心 たる名・体・宗・用・教の南無妙法蓮華経是なり。..."The fourthistheRefuge ofHon- mon. Earth emerging one thousand worlds should appear,at the beginning of Mappo pe- riod. Present Ken-Shi-Gen-Kokuis Earth emerging one. Ze-Ko-Ro-Yaku[The splendid
good medicine] signifies the profound teachings of Name, Body, Reality, Working and Teaching, the essence of the Chapter of Eternal Life of the Buddha, of the very Namu-
Myo-Hou-Ren-Ge-Kyo.) [ShowaTeihonNichirenShonin Ibun, pp.716-717.] General meaning: A question is asked. What does the episode of 'sending mes- senger to the house to tell the children who lost clear minds', appearing in the Chapter of the Eternal Life Duration of the Buddha mean? Answer. In the world
Shi-E nari. Shi-E ni shi-shu ari...(答 え て 曰 く、四 依 な り。 四 依 に 四 類 あ
-1173-
 (146) Background of the Formation of Nichiren's Theory of Daimoku-Juji (H. WATANABE)
after the death of the Buddha, four stages of Bodhisattvas would deliver the essence of the Buddha's instruction. Among the four stages, there will be four types of them....The fourth is the Shi-e(四 依, Four Refuges)of Honmon(本 門) . When the earth trembles, many Great Bodhisattvas reaching to the one thousand worlds emerging from the Earth appear for the rescue of the people of Mappo period. Therefore, the episode of `sending messengers to the house to tell the children who lost clear minds' means the fact that the Earth Emerging Bodhisattvas emerge now in Mappo period. This Splendid good medicine' is the medicine prescribed for the people of Mappo, meaning the Namu-My-H5oRen-Ge-Kyowhich was preached to be preserved as the essence of the Chapter on the Eternal Life of the Buddha (Chapter16of Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo).
Thus, Namu-Myo-H5-Ren-Ge-Kyois not just the name of the sutra. It has the
Body(本 体). and it also contains all the Hetus and Phalas(因 果)of the Buddha. It has the Working(働 き)and ithas the aspect of the very Teaching(教 法)that enve- lopes them. Thus Namu-Myo-Ho-Ren-Ge-Kyo contains five-fold profound teachings, i.e., Name, Body, Hetus and Phalas, Working and Teaching. This Five-fold profound
teaching is called'Go-Ju-Gen-Gi(五
Furthermore, in order
know that Nichiren often
Go-Ji-Kei-Zu(一 代 五 時 鶏 図)and etc. In one of them, like other Ichi-Dai-Go-Ji-Kei-
Zu and Ichi-Dai-Go-ji-Zu, Kegon sutra(華 厳 経), Agon sutra(阿 含 経), Ho-to sutra (方 等 経),Hannya sutra(般 若 経)and the Lotus Sutra(法 華 経)were mentioned, to each of which related commentaries, name of sects basing on them, the name of the founder priests and etc. were mentioned on lower section of the pages. In the section of the Lotus Sutra, we find the names like, Sho-shu-e-hyo-shu(諸 宗 依 憑 宗), Butu-
to instruct illustrated
his disciples the structure of Buddhism, we a chart depicting the structure, like Ichi-Dai-
重 玄 義).
ryu-shu(佛 立 宗), Ten-dai-shu(天 台 宗), Hokke-shu(法
and Ken-ro-shou-shu(顯 露 彰 宗)being listed side by
Shonin Ibun, p.2337.)In the first Sho-shu-e-hyo-shu(諸
read the spirit of integration of Buddhism which we discussed above.
5. Conclusion
About the idea of Daimoku-Juji, as has been discussed above, the discussions -1174-
華 宗), Himitu-shu(秘 密 宗), side.(Showa Teihon Nichiren
宗 依 懸 宗), we may be able to
 Backgroundof the Formationof Nichiren'sTheory of Daimoku-Juji(H. WATANAB(E1)47
appear to have been limitedly carried out only within the Nichiren Buddhist circle. For the logical understanding of the concept, we have to wait until the emergence of Kaimoku-Sho and Kanjin-Honzon-sho. However, as Nichiren started reciting the Daimoku from the year 5 of Kencho, it seems to be certain that the logical basis of the Daimoku-Juji had existed within deep inside of the mind of Nichiren.
In Shugo-Kokka-Ron, Nichiren did not speak of the profound logical argument for the theory of automatically transferring of both Hetus and Phalas of the Eternal Buddha. However, the meanings of`Wholeheartedly Accepting'(Ichinen-Shinju,一.念
信受)the Eterhal Buddha's guidance and of`Wholeheartedly Believing in'(zuiki,随 喜)the guidance have been discussed on the basis of the Chapter l70f Myo-Ho- Ren-Ge-xyo which assists in explaining the real essence of the Nyorai-Juryo-Hon
(如 来 壽 量 品),the crux of the Lotus SUtra.
Though it is clearly demonstrated in Nichiren's writings of later years, we should not also forget the very fact that Nichiren had long before established the fundamental interpretations on the `Acceptance and Maintenance of the Lotus Sutra' and on chanting of Daimoku(sutra title,題 目), basing on the spirit for the integration
of various Buddhist traditions under the Lotus Sutra.
参照)上 田本昌博士喜寿記念論文集 『日蓮聖人と法華仏教』(2007年3月)所 収,拙 論 「日 蓮 聖 人 初 期 の 題 目 受 持 勧 奨 に つ い て 」
〈 Key Words〉 Nichiren, Daimoku-Juji, Kuon-Shakuson, Nyorai-Metsugo-Go-Gohyaku-
Sai-Shi-Kanjin-Honzon-Sho
(Professor Emeritus, Rissho University)
-1175-
